 Is it helpful for stress, anxiety, or sleep?: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals (original version)
Is it helpful for stress, anxiety, or sleep?: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals
Table of Contents

    Introduction
    Efficacy
    Safety
    Implications for use
    References
    Disclaimer

Introduction

Withania somnifera (L.) Dunal is an evergreen shrub cultivated in tropical and subtropical areas of Asia, Africa, and Europe. It is commonly called by the Sanskrit name, ashwagandha, because the plant’s roots are said to smell like a wet horse (“ashwa” for horse and “gandha” for smell) [1]. Ashwagandha is also sometimes known as winter cherry or Indian ginseng, although it does not belong to the ginseng family. Ashwagandha root has been used in the traditional Ayurvedic and Unani medicine systems of India as an adaptogen, which is loosely defined as a compound or product that increases the ability of a person to resist, adapt, or become resilient in nonspecific ways to biological, physical, or chemical stressors [2,3]. The chemical composition of ashwagandha root and leaf differ [4]. Most commercial ashwagandha supplements contain extracts from the plant’s root, although some contain extracts from both the root and leaf.

The species name somnifera comes from the Latin word for sleep-inducing, signifying another purported property of this botanical [5]. In addition to sleep, ashwagandha is commonly promoted for stress and anxiety reduction.

Ashwagandha is rich in phytochemicals, including steroidal lactones (known as withanolides) and alkaloids. While withanolides are believed to be responsible for many of ashwagandha’s proposed effects, evidence from preclinical studies suggests that other, non-withanolide components may also be involved [6-8].
Efficacy
Stress and anxiety

Research suggests that ashwagandha extracts may lower stress, anxiety, and cortisol levels. A taskforce created by the World Federation of Societies of Biological Psychiatry and the Canadian Network for Mood and Anxiety Treatments provisionally recommends specific daily doses of ashwagandha root extract for the treatment of generalized anxiety disorder, but they also note that they cannot provide a stronger recommendation without more data.

Results from several clinical trials suggest that ashwagandha extracts may help reduce stress and anxiety. A 2021 systematic review identified seven studies that investigated the use of ashwagandha to treat stress and anxiety [8]. A total of 491 adults, all from India, with either self-reported high stress and anxiety or a diagnosed anxiety disorder, were randomized to take ashwagandha or placebo for 6 to 8 weeks. Six of the studies used extracts made from ashwagandha root alone (three studies, KSM-66), root and leaf (two studies, Sensoril or Shoden), or unspecified parts (one study), while the seventh study used dried root powder made into granules. The ashwagandha dose varied from 240 to 1,250 mg/day of extract or 12,000 mg/day of whole root granules, which is equivalent to 6,000 mg of root powder. Overall, the studies found that ashwagandha significantly reduced stress and anxiety levels (subjectively measured by validated rating scales), reduced sleeplessness and fatigue, and reduced serum cortisol levels (a stress hormone) when compared with placebo. In several studies, the benefits appeared to be greater with doses of 500 to 600 mg/day than with lower doses.

Results from most of the studies published after this 2021 review also suggest that ashwagandha has a beneficial impact on perceived stress [9-17]. For example, one clinical trial conducted in Florida included 60 men and women (mean age 34 years) who reported experiencing stress. Participants took capsules that contained 225 mg/day or 400 mg/day of a proprietary ashwagandha root and leaf extract (NooGandha) or placebo for 30 days [9]. Compared with participants in the placebo group, those in both ashwagandha groups reported positive effects on stress, anxiety, depression, and food cravings as measured by validated rating scales. In addition, participants who took the 225-mg dose had lower saliva cortisol levels than those in the placebo group.

At two health centers in India, 130 healthy men and women age 20 to 55 years with self-reported stress were randomized to take a sustained-released ashwagandha root extract (Prolanza) or placebo for 90 days [10]. The extract was standardized to contain 15 mg withanolides per 300-mg capsule, and participants took one capsule daily. Compared with those who received placebo, participants who took ashwagandha extract reported improvements in stress levels and sleep quality as measured by validated rating scales. They also had lower serum cortisol levels. In addition, participants reported improvements in psychological well-being, memory, and focus. Another study in India randomized 54 participants with mild to moderate stress and anxiety to receive either ashwagandha root extract (Shagandha) or placebo [14]. The participants in the ashwagandha group were given tablets that were standardized to contain 2.5% withanolides; each tablet included 500 mg of the root extract and 5 mg of piperine. At day 60, participants in the ashwagandha group had significantly lower scores for stress and anxiety on two validated rating scales than those in the placebo group. In addition, the quality of life scores increased significantly for people in the ashwagandha group between baseline and day 60, and the researchers noted improvements in multitasking and concentration among the participants in this group.

At the University of Colorado, Colorado Springs, 60 students (age 18–50 years) were randomized to take an ashwagandha root extract (Gaia Herbs) or placebo for 30 days in a double-blind trial [11,12]. The extract contained 2.5 mg withanolides per 350-mg capsule, and participants took two capsules daily. The investigators gathered qualitative, subjective information from participants during daily check-ins and focus groups. Participants who took ashwagandha root extract reported increased well-being, including a sense of calm; improved energy levels; heightened mental clarity; and enhanced sleep quality. While the descriptions of stress were comparable in both groups, participants who took ashwagandha were more likely to describe their stress as manageable compared with those taking placebo.

Another randomized clinical trial included 120 healthy men and women (mean age 54–55 years) who were overweight or mildly obese and experiencing low energy and fatigue [17]. Participants took an ashwagandha root extract (Witholytin, which contains 200 mg hydroalcoholic extract of ashwagandha root standardized to 1.5% withanolides) or placebo twice daily for 12 weeks. Compared with placebo, ashwagandha did not reduce perceived stress, but it did reduce fatigue.

A daily dose of 300 to 600 mg ashwagandha root extract (standardized to 5% withanolides) is provisionally recommended for the treatment of generalized anxiety disorder by an international taskforce created by the World Federation of Societies of Biological Psychiatry (WFSBP) and the Canadian Network for Mood and Anxiety Treatments (CANMAT) [18]. The taskforce issued this recommendation in 2022, and they noted that more research is needed to support a stronger recommendation.
Sleep

Evidence from a small number of studies suggests that taking ashwagandha extract may improve several aspects of sleep, including sleep quality, sleep efficiency, total sleep time, and sleep latency. These benefits tend to be more pronounced among people with insomnia.

Research is limited, but the results from a few clinical trials suggest that ashwagandha extracts may help with sleep. For example, at one study center in India, 150 healthy men and women age 18 to 65 years with self-reported sleep problems characterized by insomnia and lack of restful sleep were randomized to take an ashwagandha root and leaf extract (Shoden) or placebo for 6 weeks [19]. The extract was standardized to contain 21 mg of withanolide glycosides per 60-mg capsule, and participants took two capsules each day. Both groups reported improvements in sleep quality as measured by a validated rating scale, but the improvements were greater in the ashwagandha group (72%) than in the placebo group (29%). In addition, participants who took ashwagandha extract showed improvements in sleep efficiency (time in bed spent in sleep), total sleep time, sleep latency (time taken to fall asleep), and awakening after sleep onset as assessed by actigraphy, which involves wearing a watch monitor on the wrist to measure body motion. They also reported improvements in quality of life.

In another trial conducted in India, 80 healthy men and women age 18 to 50 years, half of them with insomnia, were randomized to take an ashwagandha root extract (KSM-66) or placebo for 8 weeks [5]. The extract was standardized to a withanolide content of more than 5% per 300-mg capsule, and participants took two capsules each day. Participants with insomnia who took ashwagandha extract showed improvements in sleep quality, sleep onset latency, mental alertness on rising, and perceived anxiety symptoms compared with those taking placebo, as measured by actigraphy and validated rating scales. Participants without insomnia who took ashwagandha also reported that ashwagandha improved their sleep but not their perceived anxiety symptoms or their mental alertness on awakening.

A 2021 systematic review and meta-analysis included five studies (including the two described above) that investigated using ashwagandha to promote sleep [20]. All the studies were conducted in India. A total of 372 adults, either self-described as healthy or with insomnia, took ashwagandha or placebo for 6 to 12 weeks. The dose of the ashwagandha supplement used in these studies ranged from 250 to 600 mg/day as a root extract (KSM-66) or, in one study, 120 mg/day of a root and leaf extract (Shoden). Overall, the studies found that ashwagandha extract had a small but significant effect on improving sleep compared with placebo. The benefits were more prominent when the dose was 600 mg/day and when the treatment duration was at least 8 weeks. Benefits were also more prominent in participants with insomnia.
Safety

Ashwagandha appears to be well tolerated for up to about 3 months of use, but its long-term safety is not known. Common side effects (e.g., loose stools, nausea, drowsiness) are usually mild. However, there are a few reports of more serious side effects, including adverse effects on liver function. Ashwagandha might also affect thyroid function and interact with some medications. Some experts advise against the use of ashwagandha by women who are pregnant and by men with hormone-sensitive prostate cancer.

In the studies described above and in many other clinical trials, ashwagandha has been well tolerated by participants for up to about 3 months of use. Common side effects are mild and include stomach upset, loose stools, nausea, and drowsiness [8,21]. Increased heart rate variability has also been reported [17]. Evidence on the safety of using ashwagandha over many months or years is lacking.

There are a few reports of more serious side effects associated with ashwagandha use, including adverse effects on liver function [22]. In a 2017 report of liver injury that was associated with ashwagandha use, a 20-year-old man in Japan developed liver dysfunction and hyperbilirubinemia after using ashwagandha (plant part and dose not specified) in combination with multiple antianxiety drugs [23]. Since then, the use of ashwagandha has been linked to acute liver injury in other individuals, some of whom had pre-existing liver disease [24-28]. These include five cases of people (three men and two women, age range 21–62 years) who reportedly took supplements that contained 450 to 1,350 mg ashwagandha (plant part not specified) daily over the course of 1 week to 4 months and experienced signs of liver injury, such as jaundice, pruritus, nausea, lethargy, abdominal discomfort, and hyperbilirubinemia [25]. In these cases and others, the conditions of the individuals improved over time after they stopped taking the supplement; some also received medical treatment [23,25-27]. However, the contents of the products that the individuals took were not independently verified in all cases, and some products were combination products that contained ashwagandha and other ingredients.

Some research suggests that ashwagandha might affect thyroid function. In one study, three adult men who took 500 mg/day of a standardized ashwagandha root and leaf extract for 8 weeks had small increases in blood thyroxine (T4) levels [29]. A small clinical trial with 50 participants with subclinical hypothyroidism found that ashwagandha root extract, at a dose of 300 mg twice daily for 8 weeks, lowered serum thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) and increased triiodothyronine (T3) and T4 levels compared with placebo [30].

Three case reports have also described thyrotoxicosis in women who were taking ashwagandha extract (age range 32–73 years) [31]. However, the doses of ashwagandha were not specified in two of these case reports, and the third case involved an unusually high dose (1,950 mg/day for more than 2 months) [32]. Discontinuing ashwagandha resolved the symptoms of thyrotoxicosis in all three cases. These findings suggest that ashwagandha might interact with thyroid hormone medications. Ashwagandha might also interact with other medications, including antidiabetes medications, antihypertensives, immunosuppressants, and sedatives [8,33].

Some experts advise against the use of ashwagandha by women who are pregnant because some reports have suggested that it has the potential to cause spontaneous abortion [8,33-38]. A risk assessment released by the Technical University of Denmark in 2020 discussed both this potential abortifacient effect of ashwagandha and potential effects on thyroid and sex hormones; Denmark subsequently banned the use of ashwagandha in 2023 [39,40]. The French Agency for Food, Environmental, and Occupational Health and Safety (ANSES) issued a statement in 2024 that recommended against using ashwagandha in certain populations, including pregnant and breastfeeding women and people with endocrine disorders [41]. One of the sources for this information is a monograph on ashwagandha root published in 2000 by the American Herbal Pharmacopoeia (AHP) [38]; however, AHP has stated that their report has been misrepresented and that there is no evidence that ashwagandha root causes abortions [42]. Ashwagandha use might also increase testosterone levels [8,17,43,44], so according to experts, it might not be safe for men with hormone-sensitive prostate cancer [36,37].
Implications for use

Ashwagandha extracts may help reduce anxiety and stress and improve sleep. However, it is challenging to develop recommendations for using ashwagandha, because the studies that have evaluated it have used various preparations and doses. Ashwagandha appears to be well tolerated during short-term use, but the long-term safety of ashwagandha is not known. In addition, ashwagandha may not be safe for certain people.

Several randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trials, most of them fairly small in size and of short duration, have found that ashwagandha may reduce perceived stress and anxiety and improve the quality and duration of sleep [7,8,20,45]. Because studies have used various ashwagandha preparations (with different extraction and standardization processes) and doses, it is difficult to identify specific extracts or recommended amounts [7,46]. In addition, most studies have been conducted as part of a traditional medical system, so the potential effects of ashwagandha when used as a dietary supplement outside of that approach remain unclear.

Ashwagandha appears to be well tolerated for up to 3 months of use. However, the efficacy and safety of long-term ashwagandha use over months or years for stress, anxiety, or sleep is not known. In addition, ashwagandha may have potential adverse effects on the liver and thyroid and might not be safe for men with prostate cancer or women who are pregnant or breastfeeding.
References

    Mandlik Ingawale DS, Namdeo AG. Pharmacological evaluation of Ashwagandha highlighting its healthcare claims, safety, and toxicity aspects. J Diet Suppl 2021;18:183-226 [PubMed abstract]
    Panossian AG, Efferth T, Shikov AN, Pozharitskaya ON, Kuchta K, et al. Evolution of the adaptogenic concept from traditional use to medical systems: Pharmacology of stress- and aging-related diseases. Med Res Rev 2021;41:630-703. [PubMed abstract]
    Gerontakos SE, Casteleijn D, Shikov AN, Wardle J. A Critical Review to Identify the Domains Used to Measure the Effect and Outcome of Adaptogenic Herbal Medicines. Yale J Biol Med 2020;93:327-46. [PubMed abstract]
    Ministry of Ayush, Government of India. Safety of Ashwagandha, Withania somnifera. Report of the Expert Committee. 2024.
    Langade D, Thakare V, Kanchi S, Kelgane S. Clinical evaluation of the pharmacological impact of ashwagandha root extract on sleep in healthy volunteers and insomnia patients: A double-blind, randomized, parallel-group, placebo-controlled study. J Ethnopharmacol 2021;264:113276. [PubMed abstract]
    Holvoet H, Long DM, Law A, McClure C, Choi J, et al. Withania somnifera Extracts Promote Resilience against Age-Related and Stress-Induced Behavioral Phenotypes in Drosophila melanogaster; a Possible Role of Other Compounds besides Withanolides. Nutrients 2022;14. [PubMed abstract]
    Speers AB, Cabey KA, Soumyanath A, Wright KM. Effects of Withania somnifera (Ashwagandha) on Stress and the Stress- Related Neuropsychiatric Disorders Anxiety, Depression, and Insomnia. Curr Neuropharmacol 2021;19:1468-95. [PubMed abstract]
    Lopresti AL, Smith SJ. Ashwagandha (Withania somnifera) for the treatment and enhancement of mental and physical conditions: A systematic review of human trials. Journal of Herbal Medicine 2021;28:100434.
    Remenapp A, Coyle K, Orange T, Lynch T, Hooper D, et al. Efficacy of Withania somnifera supplementation on adult's cognition and mood. J Ayurveda Integr Med 2022;13:100510. [PubMed abstract]
    Gopukumar K, Thanawala S, Somepalli V, Rao TSS, Thamatam VB, et al. Efficacy and Safety of Ashwagandha Root Extract on Cognitive Functions in Healthy, Stressed Adults: A Randomized, Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled Study. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med 2021;2021:8254344. [PubMed abstract]
    Baker C, Kirby JB, O'Connor J, Lindsay KG, Hutchins A, et al. The Perceived Impact of Ashwagandha on Stress, Sleep Quality, Energy, and Mental Clarity for College Students: Qualitative Analysis of a Double-Blind Randomized Control Trial. J Med Food 2022;25:1095-101. [PubMed abstract]
    ClinicalTrials.gov. The impact of ashwagandha on perceived stress, sleep and food cravings in college students 2022.
    Fuladi S, Emami SA, Mohammadpour AH, Karimani A, Manteghi AA, et al. Assessment of the Efficacy of Withania somnifera Root Extract in Patients with Generalized Anxiety Disorder: A Randomized Double-blind Placebo- Controlled Trial. Curr Rev Clin Exp Pharmacol 2021;16:191-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Majeed M, Nagabhushanam K, Mundkur L. A standardized Ashwagandha root extract alleviates stress, anxiety, and improves quality of life in healthy adults by modulating stress hormones: Results from a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study. Medicine (Baltimore) 2023;102:e35521. [PubMed abstract]
    Majeed M, Nagabhushanam K, Murali A, Vishwanathan DT, Mamidala RV, et al. A Standardized Withania somnifera (Linn.) Root Extract with Piperine Alleviates the Symptoms of Anxiety and Depression by Increasing Serotonin Levels: A Double-Blind, Randomized, Placebo-Controlled Study. J Integr Complement Med 2024;30:459-68. [PubMed abstract]
    Pandit S, Srivastav AK, Sur TK, Chaudhuri S, Wang Y, et al. Effects of Withania somnifera Extract in Chronically Stressed Adults: A Randomized Controlled Trial. Nutrients 2024;16. [PubMed abstract]
    Smith SJ, Lopresti AL, Fairchild TJ. Exploring the efficacy and safety of a novel standardized ashwagandha (Withania somnifera) root extract (Witholytin®) in adults experiencing high stress and fatigue in a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. J Psychopharmacol 2023;37:1091-104. [PubMed abstract]
    Sarris J, Ravindran A, Yatham LN, Marx W, Rucklidge JJ, et al. Clinician guidelines for the treatment of psychiatric disorders with nutraceuticals and phytoceuticals: The World Federation of Societies of Biological Psychiatry (WFSBP) and Canadian Network for Mood and Anxiety Treatments (CANMAT) Taskforce. The World Journal of Biological Psychiatry 2022;23:424-55. [PubMed abstract]
    Deshpande A, Irani N, Balkrishnan R, Benny IR. A randomized, double blind, placebo controlled study to evaluate the effects of ashwagandha (Withania somnifera) extract on sleep quality in healthy adults. Sleep Med 2020;72:28-36. [PubMed abstract]
    Cheah KL, Norhayati MN, Husniati Yaacob L, Abdul Rahman R. Effect of Ashwagandha (Withania somnifera) extract on sleep: A systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS One 2021;16:e0257843. [PubMed abstract]
    Tandon N, Yadav SS. Safety and clinical effectiveness of Withania Somnifera (Linn.) Dunal root in human ailments. J Ethnopharmacol 2020;255:112768. [PubMed abstract]
    LiverTox. Ashwagandha. In: LiverTox: Clinical and Research Information on Drug-Induced Liver Injury. Bethesda (MD): National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases; 2019. [PubMed abstract]
    Inagaki K, Mori N, Honda Y, Takaki S, Tsuji K, et al. A case of drug-induced liver injury with prolonged severe intrahepatic cholestasis induced by Ashwagandha. Kanzo 2017;58:448-54.
    Weber S, Gerbes AL. Ashwagandha-Induced Liver Injury: Self-Reports on Commercial Websites as Useful Adjunct Tools for Causality Assessment. Am J Gastroenterol 2021;116:2151-2. [PubMed abstract]
    Bjornsson HK, Bjornsson ES, Avula B, Khan IA, Jonasson JG, et al. Ashwagandha-induced liver injury: A case series from Iceland and the US Drug-Induced Liver Injury Network. Liver Int 2020;40:825-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Lubarska M, Hałasiński P, Hryhorowicz S, Mahadea DS, Łykowska-Szuber L, et al. Liver Dangers of Herbal Products: A Case Report of Ashwagandha-Induced Liver Injury. Int J Environ Res Public Health 2023;20. [PubMed abstract]
    Ireland PJ, Hardy T, Burt AD, Donnelly MC. Drug-induced hepatocellular injury due to herbal supplement ashwagandha. J R Coll Physicians Edinb 2021;51:363-5. [PubMed abstract]
    Philips CA, Valsan A, Theruvath AH, Ravindran R, Oommen TT, et al. Ashwagandha-induced liver injury-A case series from India and literature review. Hepatol Commun 2023;7. [PubMed abstract]
    Gannon JM, Forrest PE, Roy Chengappa KN. Subtle changes in thyroid indices during a placebo-controlled study of an extract of Withania somnifera in persons with bipolar disorder. J Ayurveda Integr Med 2014;5:241-5. [PubMed abstract]
    Sharma AK, Basu I, Singh S. Efficacy and Safety of Ashwagandha Root Extract in Subclinical Hypothyroid Patients: A Double-Blind, Randomized Placebo-Controlled Trial. J Altern Complement Med 2018;24:243-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Chittiboyina AG, Khan IA. Current issues in phytomedicine research - Conundrum on the chemistry of ashwagandha and its biological effects. J Ethnopharmacol 2024;325:117871. [PubMed abstract]
    Curry KM, McNeil LE, Flores A, Fuks J. Thyrotoxicosis with Ashwagandha: A Case Report. SSRN 2019.
    NatMed. Ashwagandha. 2023.
    American Herbal Products Association. American Herbal Products Association’s Botanical Safety Handbook, 2nd edition. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press LLC; 2013.
    Engels G, Brinckmann J. HerbalGram, The Journal of the American Botanical Council. Ashwagandha. 2013; Issue 99.
    National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health. Ashwagandha. 2023.
    Mikulska P, Malinowska M, Ignacyk M, Szustowski P, Nowak J, et al. Ashwagandha (Withania somnifera)-Current Research on the Health-Promoting Activities: A Narrative Review. Pharmaceutics 2023;15. [PubMed abstract]
    American Herbal Pharmacopoeia. Ashwagandha Root, Withania somnifera - Analytical, Quality Control, and Therapeutic Monograph. Santa Cruz, CA; 2000.
    Philips CA, Theruvath AH. A comprehensive review on the hepatotoxicity of herbs used in the Indian (Ayush) systems of alternative medicine. Medicine (Baltimore) 2024;103:e37903. [PubMed abstract]
    McKeown M. Why did Denmark ban Ashwagandha? McGill University, Office for Science and Society, 2023.
    ANSES. AVIS de l’Agence nationale de sécurité sanitaire de l’alimentation, de l’environnement et du travail relatif aux risques liés à l'utilisation des préparations de Withania somnifera (L.) Dunal dans les compléments alimentaires. 2024.
    American Herbal Pharmacopoeia. AHP Responds to Claims of Ashwagandha Abortifacient Effects. 2024.
    Smith SJ, Lopresti AL, Teo SYM, Fairchild TJ. Examining the Effects of Herbs on Testosterone Concentrations in Men: A Systematic Review. Adv Nutr 2021;12:744-65. [PubMed abstract]
    Lopresti AL, Drummond PD, Smith SJ. A Randomized, Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled, Crossover Study Examining the Hormonal and Vitality Effects of Ashwagandha ( Withania somnifera) in Aging, Overweight Males. Am J Mens Health 2019;13:1557988319835985. [PubMed abstract]
    D'Cruz M, Andrade C. Potential clinical applications of Ashwagandha (Withania somnifera) in medicine and neuropsychiatry. Expert Rev Clin Pharmacol 2022;15:1067-80. [PubMed abstract]
    Lopresti AL, Smith SJ, Malvi H, Kodgule R. An investigation into the stress-relieving and pharmacological actions of an ashwagandha (Withania somnifera) extract: A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study. Medicine (Baltimore) 2019;98:e17186. [PubMed abstract]

Disclaimer

This fact sheet by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Office of Dietary Supplements (ODS) provides information that should not take the place of medical advice. We encourage you to talk to your health care providers (doctor, registered dietitian, pharmacist, etc.) about your interest in, questions about, or use of dietary supplements and what may be best for your overall health. Any mention in this publication of a specific product or service, or recommendation from an organization or professional society, does not represent an endorsement by ODS of that product, service, or expert advice.

Updated: May 2, 2025



 Biotin: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals (original version)
Biotin: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals
Table of Contents

    Introduction
    Recommended Intakes
    Sources of Biotin
    Biotin Intakes and Status
    Biotin Deficiency
    Groups at Risk of Biotin Inadequacy
    Biotin and Health
    Health Risks from Excessive Biotin
    Interactions with Laboratory Tests
    Interactions with Medications
    Biotin and Healthful Diets
    References
    Disclaimer

Introduction

Biotin, a B vitamin, is an essential nutrient that is naturally present in some foods and available as a dietary supplement. This water-soluble vitamin is a cofactor for five carboxylases (propionyl-CoA carboxylase, pyruvate carboxylase, methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase [MCC], acetyl-CoA carboxylase 1, and acetyl-CoA carboxylase 2) that catalyze critical steps in the metabolism of fatty acids, glucose, and amino acids [1-5]. Biotin also plays key roles in histone modifications, gene regulation (by modifying the activity of transcription factors), and cell signaling [3].

Most biotin in foods is bound to protein, although some dietary biotin is in the free form [1,3,4,6]. Gastrointestinal proteases and peptidases break down the protein-bound forms of ingested biotin into biocytin and biotin-oligopeptides, which undergo further processing by biotinidase, an enzyme, in the intestinal lumen to release free biotin [6]. The free biotin is then absorbed in the small intestine, and most biotin is stored in the liver [1,3,6].

A limited number of reliable indicators of biotin status is available [7]. In healthy adults, the concentration of biotin is 133–329 pmol/L in serum and 18–127 nmol/24 hours in urine [2]. Abnormally low urinary excretion of biotin is an indicator of biotin deficiency, as is abnormally high excretion of 3-hydroxyisovaleric acid (higher than 3.3 mmol/mol creatinine) or 3-hydroxyisovalerylcarnitine (higher than 0.06 mmol/mol creatinine) resulting from reduced activity of MCC [2,7,8]. The most reliable individual markers of biotin status, including deficiency and sufficiency, are biotinylated MCC and propionyl-CoA carboxylase in white blood cells [7]. Oral administration of large doses of biotin increases serum concentrations of biotin and its metabolites [1,9]. However, serum concentrations of biotin and its catabolites are not good indicators of marginal biotin deficiency because they do not decrease sufficiently in people with marginal biotin deficiency for these changes to be detectable with existing tests [3,10].
Recommended Intakes

Intake recommendations for biotin and other nutrients are provided in the Dietary Reference Intakes (DRIs) developed by the Food and Nutrition Board (FNB) at the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine [1]. DRI is the general term for a set of reference values used for planning and assessing nutrient intakes of healthy people. These values, which vary by age and sex, include the following:

    Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA): Average daily level of intake sufficient to meet the nutrient requirements of nearly all (97%–98%) healthy individuals; often used to plan nutritionally adequate diets for individuals
    Adequate Intake (AI): Intake at this level is assumed to ensure nutritional adequacy; established when evidence is insufficient to develop an RDA
    Estimated Average Requirement (EAR): Average daily level of intake estimated to meet the requirements of 50% of healthy individuals; usually used to assess the nutrient intakes of groups of people and to plan nutritionally adequate diets for them; can also be used to assess the nutrient intakes of individuals
    Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL): Maximum daily intake unlikely to cause adverse health effects

The FNB found the available data to be insufficient to derive an EAR and RDA for biotin. For this reason, the FNB established only AIs for biotin. The FNB based its determination of AIs for all populations on the amount of biotin in human milk consumed by infants and then used body weight to extrapolate AIs for other groups [11]. Table 1 lists the current AIs for biotin [1].
Table 1: Adequate Intakes (AIs) for Biotin [1] Age 	Male 	Female 	Pregnancy 	Lactation
Birth to 6 months 	5 mcg 	5 mcg 		
7–12 months 	6 mcg 	6 mcg 		
1–3 years 	8 mcg 	8 mcg 		
4–8 years 	12 mcg 	12 mcg 		
9–13 years 	20 mcg 	20 mcg 		
14–18 years 	25 mcg 	25 mcg 	30 mcg 	35 mcg
19+ years 	30 mcg 	30 mcg 	30 mcg 	35 mcg
 
Sources of Biotin
Food

Many foods contain some biotin. Foods that contain the most biotin include organ meats, eggs, fish, meat, seeds, nuts, and certain vegetables (such as sweet potatoes) [2,12]. The biotin content of food can vary; for example, plant variety and season can affect the biotin content of cereal grains, and certain processing techniques (e.g., canning) can reduce the biotin content of foods [12].

Dietary avidin, a glycoprotein in raw egg whites, binds tightly to dietary biotin and prevents biotin’s absorption in the gastrointestinal tract [13,14]. Cooking denatures avidin, making it unable to interfere with biotin absorption [13].

Several food sources of biotin are listed in Table 2.
Table 2: Biotin Content of Selected Foods [5] Food 	Micrograms
(mcg) per
serving 	Percent
DV*
Beef liver, cooked, 3 ounces 	30.8 	103
Egg, whole, cooked 	10.0 	33
Salmon, pink, canned in water, 3 ounces 	5.0 	17
Pork chop, cooked, 3 ounces 	3.8 	13
Hamburger patty, cooked, 3 ounces 	3.8 	13
Sunflower seeds, roasted, ¼ cup 	2.6 	9
Sweet potato, cooked, ½ cup 	2.4 	8
Almonds, roasted, ¼ cup 	1.5 	5
Tuna, canned in water, 3 ounces 	0.6 	2
Spinach, boiled, ½ cup 	0.5 	2
Broccoli, fresh, ½ cup 	0.4 	1
Cheddar cheese, mild, 1 ounce 	0.4 	1
Milk, 2%, 1 cup 	0.3 	1
Plain yogurt, 1 cup 	0.2 	1
Oatmeal, 1 cup 	0.2 	1
Banana, ½ cup 	0.2 	1
Whole wheat bread, 1 slice 	0.0 	0
Apple, ½ cup 	0.0 	0

*DV = Daily Value. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) developed DVs to help consumers compare the nutrient contents of foods and dietary supplements within the context of a total diet. The DV for biotin is 30 mcg for adults and children age 4 years and older [15]. FDA does not require food labels to list biotin content unless biotin has been added to the food. Foods providing 20% or more of the DV are considered to be high sources of a nutrient, but foods providing lower percentages of the DV also contribute to a healthful diet.

The U.S. Department of Agriculture’s (USDA’s) FoodData Central does not list the biotin content of foods or provide lists of foods containing biotin.
Dietary supplements

Biotin is available in dietary supplements containing biotin only, in supplements containing combinations of B-complex vitamins, and in some multivitamin/mineral products [16]. The absorption rate of oral, free biotin is 100%, even when people consume pharmacologic doses of up to 20 mg/day biotin [17].
Biotin Intakes and Status

Although there are no nationally representative estimates of biotin intakes in the United States, the average biotin intake from foods in other western populations is about 35–70 mcg/day, indicating that most people in these countries consume adequate amounts of biotin [2,3].
Biotin Deficiency

Biotin deficiency is rare [12,18], and severe biotin deficiency in healthy individuals eating a normal mixed diet has never been reported [13].

The signs and symptoms of biotin deficiency typically appear gradually and can include thinning hair with progression to loss of all hair on the body; scaly, red rash around body openings (eyes, nose, mouth, and perineum); conjunctivitis; ketolactic acidosis (which occurs when lactate production exceeds lactate clearance) and aciduria (abnormal amounts of acid in urine); seizures; skin infection; brittle nails; neurological findings (e.g., depression, lethargy, hallucinations, and paresthesias of the extremities) in adults; and hypotonia, lethargy, and developmental delay in infants [2,3,13]. The rash and unusual distribution of facial fat in people with biotin deficiency is known as biotin deficiency facies [1,13].
Groups at Risk of Biotin Inadequacy

The following groups are among those most likely to have inadequate biotin status.
Individuals with biotinidase deficiency

Biotinidase deficiency is a rare autosomal recessive disorder that prevents the body from releasing free biotin, leading to biotin deficiency despite normal intake. Without treatment, biotinidase deficiency produces neurological and cutaneous symptoms, and profound biotinidase deficiency can lead to coma or death [19,20]. Because treatment with oral biotin starting at birth (or before symptoms develop) and continuing for the rest of the person’s life can prevent these symptoms, all newborns in the United States and many other countries are screened for this disorder [19,20].
Individuals with chronic alcohol exposure

Chronic exposure to alcohol inhibits the absorption of biotin [21]. Plasma biotin concentrations are low in 15% of people with chronic alcoholism [12].
Pregnant and breastfeeding women

At least a third of pregnant women develop marginal biotin deficiency in spite of normal biotin intakes; plasma and breastmilk concentrations of biotin decrease in lactating women, even when their dietary biotin intakes exceed the AI [2,18,22]. Additional research is needed to understand the clinical significance of these findings.
Biotin and Health
Hair, nail, and skin health

Signs of biotin deficiency include skin rashes, hair loss, and brittle nails [10,13]. Therefore, biotin supplements are often promoted for hair, skin, and nail health [16,23,24]. However, these claims are supported, at best, by only a few case reports and small studies.

The evidence on biotin supplementation to treat brittle nails includes three small studies that did not include a placebo group, and these reports do not indicate the baseline biotin status of study participants. One of these studies assessed the effects of 2.5 mg/day biotin for 6–15 months in 22 women with brittle, splitting, or soft nails and 10 healthy volunteers [25]. In the eight patients with brittle nails whose nail samples were obtained immediately before and after biotin supplementation, nail thickness increased by 25%. In the 14 patients with brittle nails whose nail specimens were obtained 2–4 months after starting treatment and 1–4 months after ending treatment, nail thickness increased by 7%, a difference that was not statistically significant. In the second study, 2.5 mg biotin daily for an average of 5.5 months in 45 patients with thin and brittle fingernails resulted in firmer and harder fingernails in 41 of the patients (91%) [26]. Finally, the third, retrospective study in 35 patients with brittle nails found that 2.5 mg/day biotin for 6–15 months resulted in clinical improvement in 22 of the 35 patients (63%) [27].

Only case reports are available to support claims that biotin supplements can promote hair health, and these reports were only in children [28,29]. These studies found that 3–5 mg/day biotin in children with uncombable hair syndrome (a rare disorder of the hair shaft) significantly improved hair health after 3–4 months. The evidence supporting the use of biotin supplements to support skin health is equally limited to a small number of case reports, all in infants, showing that 100 mcg to 10 mg/day resulted in dramatic improvements in rash or dermatitis as well as alopecia [30,31].

Future studies are needed to determine whether biotin supplements might improve hair, nail, and skin health, especially among healthy individuals.
Health Risks from Excessive Biotin

The FNB was unable to establish ULs for biotin because there is no evidence in humans that biotin is toxic at high intakes [1]. Several studies have found no adverse effects of 10–50 mg/day biotin, and up to 200 mg/day oral biotin or 20 mg/day intravenously in patients with biotinidase deficiency do not produce symptoms of toxicity [1,10].

High biotin intakes, and potentially even intakes greater than the AI, may pose another type of health risk [32]. Supplementing with biotin beyond recommended intakes can cause clinically significant falsely high or falsely low laboratory test results, depending on the test. These incorrect results may lead to inappropriate patient management or misdiagnosis of a medical condition. The following section has more details on these interactions.
Interactions with Laboratory Tests

Very high intakes of biotin may interfere with diagnostic assays that use biotin-streptavidin technology and are commonly used to measure levels of hormones (such as thyroid hormone) and other analytes such as 25-hydroxyvitamin D, producing falsely normal or abnormal results [9,32]. As a result, a few recent case reports have described findings falsely indicating Graves' disease and severe hyperthyroidism in patients taking 10–300 mg biotin per day, including six children receiving high doses of biotin (2–15 mg/kg body weight per day) to treat inherited metabolic diseases [33-37].

Even a single 10 mg dose of biotin has interfered with thyroid function tests administered within 24 hours of taking the supplement [38]. A small study in six healthy adults who took 10 mg/day of supplemental biotin for 1 week found interference in several biotinylated assays, including falsely decreased levels of thyroid stimulating hormone (which could lead to a misdiagnosis of thyrotoxicosis) and N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide (which could result in a failure to identify congestive heart failure) [9]. According to FDA, a patient with a high intake of supplemental biotin died following a troponin test (to help diagnose a heart attack) that gave a falsely low result because the test was subject to biotin interference [32].

FDA advises health care providers to ask their patients about any supplements they may be taking that contain biotin and to consider biotin interference as a possible source of error if laboratory test results do not match the clinical presentation of the patient [32].
Interactions with Medications

Biotin can interact with certain medications, and some medications can have an adverse effect on biotin levels. One example is provided below. Individuals taking this and other medications on a regular basis should discuss their biotin status with their health care providers.
Anticonvulsants

In a study in 264 people with epilepsy, anticonvulsant treatment for at least 1 year was associated with significantly lower serum biotin levels than in control group patients [39]. The anticonvulsants used included carbamazepine (Tegretol, Carbatrol, Epitol, Equetro), primidone (Mysoline), phenytoin (Dilantin, Phenytek), and phenobarbital (Luminal, Solfoton) as well as combinations of these medications. A few other, smaller studies have found similar results [40,41]. The reason could be that anticonvulsant treatment increases biotin catabolism, which leads to reduced biotin status and inhibition of intestinal biotin absorption [40,42].
Biotin and Healthful Diets

The federal government's 2020–2025 Dietary Guidelines for Americans notes that "Because foods provide an array of nutrients and other components that have benefits for health, nutritional needs should be met primarily through foods. ... In some cases, fortified foods and dietary supplements are useful when it is not possible otherwise to meet needs for one or more nutrients (e.g., during specific life stages such as pregnancy)."

For more information about building a healthy dietary pattern, refer to the Dietary Guidelines for Americans and the USDA's MyPlate.

The Dietary Guidelines for Americans describes a healthy dietary pattern as one that

    Includes a variety of vegetables; fruits; grains (at least half whole grains); fat-free and low-fat milk, yogurt, and cheese; and oils.
        Some fruits, vegetables, dairy products, and whole grains contain biotin.
    Includes a variety of protein foods such as lean meats; poultry; eggs; seafood; beans, peas, and lentils; nuts and seeds; and soy products.
        ​​​​​​​Eggs and some organ meats are good sources of biotin; many nuts, seeds, seafood, and lean meats contain biotin.
    Limits foods and beverages higher in added sugars, saturated fat, and sodium.
    Limits alcoholic beverages.
    Stays within your daily calorie needs.

References

    Institute of Medicine. Food and Nutrition Board. Dietary Reference Intakes: Thiamin, Riboflavin, Niacin, Vitamin B6, Folate, Vitamin B12, Pantothenic Acid, Biotin, and Choline. Washington, DC: National Academy Press; 1998.
    Mock DM. Biotin. In: Ross AC, Caballero B, Cousins RJ, Tucker KL, Ziegler TR, eds. Modern Nutrition in Health and Disease. 11th ed. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2014:390-8.
    Zempleni J, Wijeratne SSK, Kuroishi T. Biotin. In: Erdman JW, Macdonald IA, Zeisel SH, eds. Present Knowledge in Nutrition. 10th ed. Washington, DC: Wiley-Blackwell; 2012:359-74.
    Pacheco-Alvarez D, Solórzano-Vargas RS, Del Río AL. Biotin in metabolism and its relationship to human disease. Arch Med Res 2002;33:439-47. [PubMed abstract]
    Staggs CG, Sealey WM, McCabe BJ, Teague AM, Mock DM. Determination of the biotin content of select foods using accurate and sensitive HPLC/avidin binding. Journal of food composition and analysis: an official publication of the United Nations University, International Network of Food Data Systems 2004;17:767-76. [PubMed abstract]
    Said HM. Biotin: biochemical, physiological and clinical aspects. Subcell Biochem 2012;56:1-19. [PubMed abstract]
    Eng WK, Giraud D, Schlegel VL, Wang D, Lee BH, Zempleni J. Identification and assessment of markers of biotin status in healthy adults. Br J Nutr 2013;110:321-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Mock DM, Stratton SL, Horvath TD, Bogusiewicz A, Matthews NI, Henrich CL, et al. Urinary excretion of 3-hydroxyisovaleric acid and 3-hydroxyisovaleryl carnitine increases in response to a leucine challenge in marginally biotin-deficient humans. J Nutr 2011;141:1925-30. [PubMed abstract]
    Li D, Radulescu A, Shrestha RT, Root M, Karger AB, Killeen AA, et al. Association of biotin ingestion with performance of hormone and nonhormone assays in healthy adults. JAMA 2017;318:1150-60. [PubMed abstract]
    Zempleni J, Wijeratne SSK, Hassan YI. Biotin. Biofactors 2009;35:36-46. [PubMed abstract]
    Institute of Medicine. Dietary reference intakes: the essential guide to nutrient requirements. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2006.
    Combs GF, Jr. Biotin. In: Combs GF, Jr., ed. The vitamins: fundamental aspects in nutrition and health. Third ed. Burlington, MA: Elsevier Academic Press; 2008:331-44.
    Mock DM. Biotin. In: Coates PM, Betz JM, Blackman MR, et al., eds. Encyclopedia of Dietary Supplements. 2nd ed. London and New York: Informa Healthcare; 2010:43-51.
    Said HM. Biotin: the forgotten vitamin. Am J Clin Nutr 2002;75:179-80. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Food Labeling: Revision of the Nutrition and Supplement Facts Labels. 2016.
    National Institutes of Health. Dietary Supplement Label Database. 2017.
    Zempleni J, Mock DM. Bioavailability of biotin given orally to humans in pharmacologic doses. Am J Clin Nutr 1999;69:504-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Perry CA, West AA, Gayle A, Lucas LK, Yan J, Jiang X, et al. Pregnancy and lactation alter biomarkers of biotin metabolism in women consuming a controlled diet. J Nutr 2014;144:1977-84. [PubMed abstract]
    Wolf B. Biotinidase deficiency and our champagne legacy. Gene 2016;589:142-50. [PubMed abstract]
    Kury S, Ramaekers V, Bezieau S, Wolf B. Clinical utility gene card for: Biotinidase deficiency-update 2015. Eur J Hum Genet 2016;24. [PubMed abstract]
    Srinivasan P, Kapadia R, Biswas A, Said HM. Chronic alcohol exposure inhibits biotin uptake by pancreatic acinar cells: possible involvement of epigenetic mechanisms. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2014;307:G941-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Mock DM. Marginal biotin deficiency is common in normal human pregnancy and is highly teratogenic in mice. J Nutr 2009;139:154-7. [PubMed abstract]
    D'Amato P. Biotin: 5 healthy benefits of this B vitamin. Chatelaine, 2016.
    Ebony. Black hair and biotin: can this vitamin really help your hair grow? Ebony, 2014.
    Colombo VE, Gerber F, Bronhofer M, Floersheim GL. Treatment of brittle fingernails and onychoschizia with biotin: scanning electron microscopy. J Am Acad Dermatol 1990;23:1127-32. [PubMed abstract]
    Floersheim GL. [Treatment of brittle fingernails with biotin]. Z Hautkr 1989;64:41-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Hochman LG, Scher RK, Meyerson MS. Brittle nails: response to daily biotin supplementation. Cutis 1993;51:303-5. [PubMed abstract]
    Boccaletti V, Zendri E, Giordano G, Gnetti L, De Panfilis G. Familial Uncombable Hair Syndrome: Ultrastructural Hair Study and Response to Biotin. Pediatr Dermatol 2007;24:E14-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Shelley WB, Shelley ED. Uncombable hair syndrome: observations on response to biotin and occurrence in siblings with ectodermal dysplasia. J Am Acad Dermatol 1985;13:97-102. [PubMed abstract]
    Mock DM, Baswell DL, Baker H, Holman RT, Sweetman L. Biotin deficiency complicating parenteral alimentation: Diagnosis, metabolic repercussions, and treatment. The Journal of Pediatrics 1985;106:762-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Fujimoto W, Inaoki M, Fukui T, Inoue Y, Kuhara T. Biotin deficiency in an infant fed with amino acid formula. J Dermatol 2005;32:256-61. [PubMed abstract]
    FDA. The FDA warns that biotin may interfere with lab tests: FDA safety communication.
    Kummer S, Hermsen D, Distelmaier F. Biotin treatment mimicking Graves' disease. N Engl J Med 2016;375:704-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Sharma A, Baumann NA, Shah P. Biotin-induced biochemical Graves disease: a teachable moment. JAMA Intern Med 2017;177:571-2. [PubMed abstract]
    Barbesino G. Misdiagnosis of Graves' disease with apparent severe hyperthyroidism in a patient taking biotin megadoses. Thyroid 2016;26:860-3. [PubMed abstract]
    Elston MS, Sehgal S, Du Toit S, Yarndley T, Conaglen JV. Factitious Graves' disease due to biotin immunoassay interference‒a case and review of the literature. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2016;101:3251-5. [PubMed abstract]
    Piketty ML, Polak M, Flechtner I, Gonzales-Briceno L, Souberbielle JC. False biochemical diagnosis of hyperthyroidism in streptavidin-biotin-based immunoassays: the problem of biotin intake and related interferences. Clin Chem Lab Med 2017;55:780-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Biscolla RPM, Chiamolera MI, Kanashiro I, Maciel RMB, Vieira JGH. A single 10 mg oral dose of biotin interferes with thyroid function tests. Thyroid 2017;27:1099-1100. [PubMed abstract]
    Krause KH, Berlit P, Bonjour JP. Impaired biotin status in anticonvulsant therapy. Ann Neurol 1982;12:485-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Mock DM, Dyken ME. Biotin catabolism is accelerated in adults receiving long-term therapy with anticonvulsants. Neurology 1997;49:1444-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Mock DM, Mock NI, Nelson RP, Lombard KA. Disturbances in biotin metabolism in children undergoing long-term anticonvulsant therapy. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr 1998;26:245-50. [PubMed abstract]
    Said HM, Redha R, Nylander W. Biotin transport in the human intestine: inhibition by anticonvulsant drugs. Am J Clin Nutr 1989;49:127-31. [PubMed abstract]

Disclaimer

This fact sheet by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Office of Dietary Supplements (ODS) provides information that should not take the place of medical advice. We encourage you to talk to your health care providers (doctor, registered dietitian, pharmacist, etc.) about your interest in, questions about, or use of dietary supplements and what may be best for your overall health. Any mention in this publication of a specific product or service, or recommendation from an organization or professional society, does not represent an endorsement by ODS of that product, service, or expert advice.

Updated: January 10, 2022


 Black Cohosh: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals (original version)
Black Cohosh: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals
Table of Contents

    Introduction
    Black Cohosh Dietary Supplements
    Black Cohosh and Menopausal Symptoms
    Health Risks
    Interactions with Medications
    References
    Disclaimer

Introduction

Black cohosh (Actaea racemosa or Cimicifuga racemosa), a member of the buttercup family, is a perennial plant native to North America. Other, mostly historical, names for this herb include snakeroot, black bugbane, rattleweed, macrotys, and rheumatism weed [1,2]. Black cohosh has a long history of use. Native Americans used it, for example, to treat musculoskeletal pain, fever, cough, pneumonia, sluggish labor, and menstrual irregularities [3]. European settlers used black cohosh as a tonic to support women's reproductive health [4].

Today, black cohosh is most commonly used for menopausal symptoms, including hot flashes (also called hot flushes) and night sweats (together known as vasomotor symptoms), vaginal dryness, heart palpitations, tinnitus, vertigo, sleep disturbances, nervousness, and irritability [5,6]. Menopause, which typically occurs in women at about 51 years of age, is the cessation of menstruation and the end of a woman’s reproductive period [5].

This fact sheet provides an overview of the use of black cohosh to relieve menopausal symptoms.
Black Cohosh Dietary Supplements

Preparations of black cohosh are made from its roots and rhizomes (underground stems). They are sold as dietary supplements in such forms as powdered whole herb, liquid extracts, and dried extracts in pill form [7].

Available preparations vary considerably in their chemical composition, in part because the compounds in black cohosh that may be responsible for any relief of menopausal symptoms are not known. Substances in black cohosh that may account for its activity include triterpene glycosides such as actein, 23-epi-26-deoxyactein, and cimicifugoside; resins, such as cimicifugin; and aromatic acid derivatives such as caffeic, isoferulic, and fukinolic acids [8,9].

Products containing black cohosh extract are frequently standardized to provide at least 1 mg triterpene glycosides per daily dose [10]. Remifemin, a commercial black cohosh product used in several studies included in a 2012 Cochrane Review described below, is an extract currently standardized to be equivalent to 40 mg black cohosh root/rhizome (extracted with isopropyl alcohol) per daily dose of two tablets, but it is not standardized to triterpene glycoside content [7,11]. The product has been on the market for years and has been reformulated over time [10].
Black Cohosh and Menopausal Symptoms

Studies using various designs since the 1950s have attempted to determine whether black cohosh affects menopausal symptoms [12]. Complicating efforts to understand the efficacy of black cohosh for treating menopausal symptoms is the wide variation in the chemical compositions of formulations. Black cohosh's active ingredients and potential mechanism(s) of action are unknown. Studies have found varying results for the plant's effects on human physiology as to whether, for example, it raises the body's levels of estrogen, which is present in lower levels in menopausal women than in premenopausal women, or whether it affect levels of luteinizing hormone or follicle-stimulating hormone [13,14]. It is not clear whether black cohosh affects the structure and activity of vaginal and uterine tissues [5,15]. Some researchers believe that black cohosh might exert its effects through a brain-related action, such as modulation of serotonergic pathways, or through its potential ability to act as an antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, or selective estrogen receptor modulator [5,15-17].

Two high-quality randomized controlled trials investigating black cohosh for menopausal symptoms are described here. One, published in 2006, assigned 351 women age 45–55 years experiencing daytime hot flashes and night sweats into one of five groups to take one of the following [18]:

    160 mg/day black cohosh (70% ethanolic extract standardized to contain 2.5% triterpene glycosides)
    A multibotanical preparation containing 200 mg black cohosh along with Siberian ginseng, dong quai, and other ingredients
    The same multibotanical preparation plus two daily servings of soy foods providing 12–20 g soy protein
    Hormone therapy (estrogen with or without progesterone)
    A placebo

After 3, 6, and 12 months of supplementation or placebo, the number and intensity of hot flashes and night sweats did not differ between the herbal-intervention groups and the placebo group, with one exception. At 12 months, participants consuming the multibotanical preparation plus soy foods had significantly worse symptom intensity than those consuming the placebo.

Another randomized controlled trial published in 2009 assigned 88 perimenopausal and postmenopausal women (mean age 53 years; 55% from underrepresented minority groups) who were experiencing at least 35 hot flashes and night sweats per week into one of four groups to take one of the following [19]:

    128 mg/day black cohosh (75% ethanolic extract standardized to contain 5.7% triterpene glycosides)
    398 mg/day red clover (ethanolic extract of the aerial parts standardized to 120 mg isoflavones)
    Hormone therapy (estrogen and progesterone)
    A placebo

After 3, 6, 9, and 12 months of supplementation or placebo, the number of vasomotor symptoms declined significantly in all groups. However, there were no statistically significant differences between the black cohosh and red clover groups compared to placebo, with one exception. The black cohosh group showed worse symptom intensity at 6 and 9 months. This study also investigated secondary endpoints such as somatic symptoms (e.g., insomnia and fatigue), mood changes (e.g., depression and anxiety), and sexual dysfunction (e.g., vaginal dryness). For most of these outcomes, no significant differences were observed between any of the treatment groups at any time.

A 2012 Cochrane Review evaluated 16 randomized clinical trials on the effectiveness of black cohosh in reducing menopausal symptoms, including hot flushes, night sweats, vaginal dryness, and combinations of symptoms measured by validated rating scales [5]. (The two trials discussed above were included in this Cochrane Review.) The 16 included trials randomized a total of 2,027 women (mean age 50.5 to 56.4 years), and their samples ranged from 23 to 351 participants. Study durations were 8 to 54 weeks, with a mean duration of 22.8 weeks. Participants received a daily dose of various formulations of 8 to 160 mg/day black cohosh extract, with a median dose of 40 mg/day. In some cases, the authors of the original study reports indicated that the extract they used came from the root/rhizome, they had extracted the product using isopropyl alcohol or ethanol, and/or they had standardized the extract to contain a specific amount of triterpene glycosides. The studies were highly heterogeneous with respect to such factors as design, duration, type and amount of black cohosh used, and main findings. The review’s authors concluded that there was "insufficient evidence" from these trials "to either support or oppose the use of black cohosh for menopausal symptoms."

A 2016 systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials examined four studies of herbal and plant-based therapies that included black cohosh (three of which were examined in the Cochrane Review described above) to treat menopausal symptoms [20]. The trials randomized a total of 511 women to a daily dose of various formulations of 6.5 to 160 mg/day black cohosh extract or placebo. There were no significant associations between supplementation with black cohosh and reduction in the number of vasomotor symptoms, such as hot flashes. Furthermore, there were no beneficial associations between black cohosh use and relief of menopausal symptoms using self-reported rating scales.

The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, in its 2015 clinical guidelines for managing menopausal symptoms, concluded that "data do not show that" herbal dietary supplements like black cohosh "are efficacious for the treatment of vasomotor symptoms" [21]. The North American Menopause Society advises clinicians against recommending herbal therapies such as black cohosh because "they are unlikely to be beneficial" (italics in original) in alleviating vasomotor symptoms [15].

The Cochrane Review found adequate justification for conducting further studies on black cohosh’s use to treat menopausal symptoms [5]. Its authors recommended that researchers conduct higher quality trials with larger samples and provide more details about their experimental protocols. Others have recommended that researchers should completely and comprehensively describe the black cohosh preparation they used so that other researchers could use the same or similar products [22]. It is also important to independently analyze and verify the product’s composition to ensure its identity and quality [23].
Health Risks

Clinical trials using various black cohosh preparations to treat menopausal symptoms have shown that its use is associated with a low incidence of adverse effects. The most commonly reported side effects are gastrointestinal upset and rashes, both of which are mild and transient [1,24]. Other reported adverse effects in clinical trials have included breast pain/enlargement, infection, vaginal bleeding/spotting, and musculoskeletal complaints, although their incidence was similar in women taking black cohosh and those taking placebo [5]. Most studies have examined black cohosh use for short periods, typically 6 months or less, so no published studies have assessed the long-term safety of black cohosh in humans.

Across the world, reports have described at least 83 cases of liver damage—including hepatitis, liver failure, elevated liver enzymes, and assorted other liver injuries—associated with black cohosh use [1,25]. However, there is no evidence of a causal relationship. It is possible that at least some reported cases of hepatotoxicity were due to impurities, adulterants, or incorrect Acteae species in the black cohosh products used. However, no one independently analyzed these products to confirm the existence of these problems [3,26-28].

In 2007, the Australian Department of Health began requiring that products containing black cohosh carry the following label statement: "Warning: Black cohosh may harm the liver in some individuals. Use under the supervision of a healthcare professional" [29]. In 2008, the U.S. Pharmacopeia (a nonprofit standard-setting organization for foods and drugs) recommended labeling black cohosh products with the following cautionary statement: "Discontinue use and consult a healthcare practitioner if you have a liver disorder or develop symptoms of liver trouble, such as abdominal pain, dark urine, or jaundice" [30]. However, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration does not require such a warning on black cohosh product labels.

The American Herbal Products Association recommends that pregnant women not take black cohosh except under the supervision of their health care provider because studies have not rigorously evaluated its use during pregnancy [1]. The U.S. Pharmacopeia advises that individuals with liver disorders should also avoid black cohosh [30]. It adds that users who develop symptoms of liver trouble, such as abdominal pain, dark urine, or jaundice, while taking the supplement should discontinue use and contact their doctor.
Interactions with Medications

Black cohosh is not known to have any clinically relevant interactions with medications, although this has not been systematically studied [1].
References

    Gardner Z, McGuffin M, eds. American Herbal Products Association's botanical safety handbook. Second ed. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press; 2013.
    Gafner S. Black cohosh laboratory guidance document. 2015.
    Betz JM, Anderson L, Avigan MI, Barnes J, Farnsworth NR, Gerdén B, et al. Black cohosh: considerations of safety and benefit. Nutr Today 2009;44:155-62.
    Foster S. Black cohosh: a literature review. HerbalGram 1999;45:35-50.
    Leach MJ, Moore V. Black cohosh (Cimicifuga spp.) for menopausal symptoms. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2012:CD007244. [PubMed abstract]
    Foster S. Exploring the peripatetic maze of black cohosh adulteration. HerbalGram 2013;May-July:32-51.
    National Institutes of Health. Dietary Supplement Label Database. 2017.
    Mills S, Bone K. Principles and practice of phytotherapy. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone; 2000.
    Kruse SO, Lohning A, Pauli GF, Winterhoff H, Nahrstedt A. Fukiic and piscidic acid esters from the rhizome of Cimicifuga racemosa and the in vitro estrogenic activity of fukinolic acid.
    Planta Med 1999;65:763-4. [PubMed abstract]
    ConsumerLab.com. Product review: menopause supplements (soy and red clover isoflavones, black cohosh) and progesterone creams. 2016.
    Schwabe North American, Incorporated. Remifemin®.
    Fabricant DS, Krause EC, Farnsworth NR. Black cohosh. In: Coates PM, Betz JM, Blackman MR, et al., eds. Encyclopedia of dietary supplements. Second ed. New York: Informa Healthcare;2010:60-74.
    Raus K, Brucker C, Gorkow C, Wuttke W. First-time proof of endometrial safety of the special black cohosh extract (Actaea or Cimicifuga racemosa extract) CR BNO 1055. Menopause 2006;13:678-91. [PubMed abstract]
    Liske E, Hanggi W, Henneicke-von Zepelin HH, Boblitz N, Wustenberg P, Rahlfs VW. Physiological investigation of a unique extract of black cohosh (Cimicifugae racemosae rhizoma): a 6-month clinical study demonstrates no systemic estrogenic effect. J Womens Health Gend Based Med 2002;11:163-74. [PubMed abstract]
    The North American Menopause Society. Nonhormonal management of menopause-associated vasomotor symptoms: 2015 position statement of The North American Menopause Society. Menopause 2015;22:1155-72. [PubMed abstract]
    Borrelli F, Izzo AA, Ernst E. Pharmacological effects of Cimicifuga racemosa. Life Sci 2003;73:1215-29. [PubMed abstract]
    Wuttke W, Jarry H, Becker T, Schultens A, Christoffel V, Gorkow C, et al. Phytoestrogens: endocrine disrupters or replacement for hormone replacement therapy? Maturitas 2003;44 Suppl 1:S9-20. [PubMed abstract]
    Newton KM, Reed SD, LaCroix AZ, Grothaus LC, Ehrlich K, Guiltinan J. Treatment of vasomotor symptoms of menopause with black cohosh, multibotanicals, soy, hormone therapy, or placebo: a randomized trial. Ann Intern Med 2006;145:869-79. [PubMed abstract]
    Geller SE, Shulman LP, van Breemen RB, Banuvar S, Zhou Y, Epstein G, et al. Safety and efficacy of black cohosh and red clover for the management of vasomotor symptoms: a randomized controlled trial. Menopause 2009;16:1156-66. [PubMed abstract]
    Franco OH, Chowdhury R, Troup J, Voortman T, Kunutsor S, Kavousi M, et al. Use of plant-based therapies and menopausal symptoms: a systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA 2016;315:2554-63. [PubMed abstract]
    ACOG Practice Bulletin No. 141: management of menopausal symptoms. Obstet Gynecol 2014;123:202-16. [PubMed abstract]
    Swanson CA. Suggested guidelines for articles about botanical dietary supplements. Am J Clin Nutr 2002;75:8-10. [PubMed abstract]
    Office of Dietary Supplements, National Institutes of Health. Dietary Supplement Analytical Methods and Reference Materials Program (AMRM).
    Borrelli F, Ernst E. Black cohosh (Cimicifuga racemosa): a systematic review of adverse events. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2008;199:455-66. [PubMed abstract]
    Teschke R, Schwarzenboeck A, Schmidt-Taenzer W, Wolff A, Hennermann KH. Herb induced liver injury presumably caused by black cohosh: a survey of initially purported cases and herbal quality specifications. Ann Hepatol 2011;10:249-59. [PubMed abstract]
    National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine, Office of Dietary Supplements. Workshop on the safety of black cohosh in clinical studies. 2004.
    Jiang B, Kronenberg F, Nuntanakorn P, Qiu MH, Kennelly EJ. Evaluation of the botanical authenticity and phytochemical profile of black cohosh products by high-performance liquid chromatography with selected ion monitoring liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry. J Agric Food Chem 2006;54:3242-53. [PubMed abstract]
    Health Canada. Black cohosh products and liver toxicity: update. 2010.
    Australian Government Department of Health, Therapeutic Goods Administration. New labelling requirements and consumer information for medicines containing black cohosh. 2007.
    Mahady GB, Low Dog T, Barrett ML, Chavez ML, Gardiner P, Ko R, et al. United States Pharmacopeia review of the black cohosh case reports of hepatotoxicity. Menopause 2008;15:628-38. [PubMed abstract]

Disclaimer

This fact sheet by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Office of Dietary Supplements (ODS) provides information that should not take the place of medical advice. We encourage you to talk to your healthcare providers (doctor, registered dietitian, pharmacist, etc.) about your interest in, questions about, or use of dietary supplements and what may be best for your overall health. Any mention in this publication of a specific product or service, or recommendation from an organization or professional society, does not represent an endorsement by ODS of that product, service, or expert advice.

Updated: June 3, 2020


 Boron: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals (original version)
Boron: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals
Table of Contents

    Introduction
    Recommended Intakes
    Sources of Boron
    Boron Intakes and Status
    Boron Deficiency
    Boron and Health
    Health Risks from Excessive Boron
    Interactions with Medications
    Boron and Healthful Diets
    References
    Disclaimer

Introduction

Boron is a trace element that is naturally present in many foods and available as a dietary supplement. It is a structural component of plant cell walls and is required for plant growth, pollination, and seed formation [1].

Boron is not classified as an essential nutrient for humans because research has not yet identified a clear biological function for boron [2]. However, it might have beneficial effects on such functions as reproduction and development, calcium metabolism, bone formation, brain function, insulin and energy substrate metabolism, immunity, and the function of steroid hormones (including vitamin D and estrogen) [1-14].

Boron is present in foods and beverages as inorganic borates as well as mono- or di-sugar-borate esters, such as calcium fructoborate [14,15]. Most ingested boron is hydrolyzed to boric acid within the gastrointestinal tract [6]. The body absorbs about 85%–90% of ingested boron [2,4]. However, very little is known about how or where in the gastrointestinal tract absorption occurs [8].

Boron does not accumulate in most body tissues, but bone, nails, and hair have higher boron levels than other body tissues, whereas fat has lower levels [9]. Boric acid is the main form of boron in blood, urine, and other body fluids [2,4,7]. The lack of substantial changes in blood boron levels in response to large increases in dietary intakes suggests that the body maintains boron homeostasis, likely by increasing urinary excretion, but the regulatory mechanisms for boron homeostasis have not been identified [6]. Boron is excreted mainly in the urine, and small amounts are excreted in the feces, sweat, breath, and bile [9,10].

Boron status is not routinely measured in clinical practice. Most studies suggest that urinary boron levels correlate with boron intakes [2,4,16,17]. Fasting plasma concentrations of boron in postmenopausal women range from 34 to 95 ng/mL (3.14 to 8.79 mcmol/L) [4].
Recommended Intakes

Intake recommendations for nutrients are provided in the Dietary Reference Intakes (DRIs) developed by an expert committee of the Food and Nutrition Board (FNB) at the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine [2]. DRI is the general term for a set of reference values used for planning and assessing nutrient intakes of healthy people. These values, which vary by age and sex, include the following:

    Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA): Average daily level of intake sufficient to meet the nutrient requirements of nearly all (97%–98%) healthy individuals; often used to plan nutritionally adequate diets for individuals
    Adequate Intake (AI): Intake at this level is assumed to ensure nutritional adequacy; established when evidence is insufficient to develop an RDA
    Estimated Average Requirement (EAR): Average daily level of intake estimated to meet the requirements of 50% of healthy individuals; usually used to assess the nutrient intakes of groups of people and to plan nutritionally adequate diets for them; can also be used to assess the nutrient intakes of individuals
    Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL): Maximum daily intake unlikely to cause adverse health effects

The FNB found the existing data insufficient to derive an RDA, AI, or EAR for boron [2]. The World Health Organization estimates that an acceptable safe range of boron intakes for adults is 1–13 mg/day [8].
Sources of Boron
Food

Plant foods—including fruit, tubers, and legumes—contain the largest amounts of boron [2,6,15,18,19]. Wine, cider, and beer also contain boron [8].

The main sources of boron in the diets of people in the United States are coffee, milk, apples, dried and cooked beans, and potatoes, primarily because people tend to consume large amounts of these foods [7,15]. Among toddlers, 38% of boron intakes comes from fruits and fruit juices and 19% from milk and cheese [6,20]. For adolescents, milk and cheese products account for 18%–20% of boron intakes, whereas beverages, especially instant coffee, represent the largest dietary source of boron for adults [6].

The amount of boron in plant foods depends somewhat on the boron content of the soil and water where they were grown [7,21]. Areas of the world with limited boron in the soil include Brazil, Japan, and most of the United States, mainly because of high levels of rainfall, which leaches boron out of the soil [21]. In contrast, arid regions of the world—including California and parts of Turkey, Argentina, Chile, Russia, China, and Peru—have higher boron concentrations [21,22].

Boron concentrations are about 0.27 mg/L in breast milk and 0.33 mg/L in cow’s milk [23]. Water contains boron, but the concentration varies considerably by source [19]. The median boron concentration of drinking water in the United States is 0.031 mg/L [24].

Selected food sources of boron are listed in Table 1. The U.S. Department of Agriculture’s (USDA’s) FoodData Central [25] does not list the boron content of foods or provide lists of foods containing boron. Therefore, information on boron levels in foods is limited.
Table 1: Boron Content of Selected Foods [15,18] Food 	Milligrams (mg)
per serving
Prune juice, 1 cup 	1.43
Avocado, raw, cubed, ½ cup 	1.07
Raisins, 1.5 ounces 	0.95
Peaches, 1 medium 	0.80
Grape juice, 1 cup 	0.76
Apples, 1 medium 	0.66
Pears, 1 medium 	0.50
Peanuts, roasted, salted, 1 ounce 	0.48
Beans, refried, ½ cup 	0.48
Peanut butter, 2 tablespoons 	0.46
Apple juice, 1 cup 	0.45
Chili con carne, with beans, 1 cup 	0.41
Grapes, ½ cup 	0.37
Oranges, 1 medium 	0.37
Lima beans, dry, cooked, ½ cup 	0.35
Applesauce, ½ cup 	0.34
Fruit cocktail, canned, in heavy syrup, ½ cup 	0.26
Broccoli, boiled, chopped, ½ cup 	0.20
Orange juice, 1 cup 	0.18
Spinach, boiled, ½ cup 	0.16
Banana, medium 	0.16
Spaghetti sauce, ½ cup 	0.16
Cantaloupe, cubed, ½ cup 	0.14
Carrots, raw, 1 medium 	0.14
Peas, green, cooked, ½ cup 	0.10
Potato chips, 1 ounce, about 22 chips 	0.09
French fries, frozen, deep fried, 10 fries 	0.08
Coffee, 1 cup 	0.07
Lettuce, chopped, loosely packed, 1 cup 	0.06
Tomatoes, raw, chopped, ½ cup 	0.06
Tuna, canned, water packed, 3 ounces 	0.05
Milk, whole, 1 cup 	0.04
Corn, cooked, ½ cup 	0.04
Rice, white, cooked, ½ cup 	0.03
Chicken breast, broiled, ½ breast 	0.03
Tea, brewed, 1 cup 	0.02
Onions, raw, chopped, 1 tablespoon 	0.02
Ice cream, ½ cup 	0.02
Bread, white, 1 slice 	0.01

The U.S. Food and Drug Administration developed Daily Values (DVs) to help consumers compare the nutrient contents of products within the context of a total diet. Because the FNB has not established an RDA or AI for boron [2], boron does not have a DV [26].
Dietary supplements

Boron is available in dietary supplements containing only boron and in supplements containing boron in combination with a few other nutrients, often other minerals. Common amounts of elemental boron in dietary supplements range from 0.15 to 6 mg [27].

In dietary supplements, boron is present in many different forms, including sodium borate, sodium tetraborate, boron amino acid chelate, boron ascorbate, boron aspartate, boron citrate, boron gluconate, boron glycinate, boron picolinate, and calcium fructoborate [6,27]. In a small human study, boron as sodium tetraborate significantly increased plasma boron levels within 4–6 hours of consumption [5], but no data are available on the relative bioavailability of different forms of supplemental boron.

The Supplement Facts label on a dietary supplement product declares the amount of elemental boron in the product, not the weight of the entire boron-containing compound.
Boron Intakes and Status

According to data from the Third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES III; 1988–1994) and the Continuing Survey of Food Intakes by Individuals (1994–1996), median dietary boron intakes range from 0.87 to 1.35 mg/day in adults, 1.05 to 1.08 mg/day in pregnant women, and 0.75 to 0.96 mg/day in school-age children [2]. Vegetarians tend to have higher intakes of boron than nonvegetarians because boron is plentiful in plant foods [15]. The median dietary boron intake in lactating women is 1.27 mg/day [2]. Boron intakes are about 0.55 mg/day among infants and about 0.54 mg/day among toddlers [6].

Total median boron intakes from dietary supplements and foods are about 1.0 to 1.5 mg/day for adults [2].
Boron Deficiency

In humans, boron deficiency signs and symptoms have not been firmly established. Limited data suggest that boron deficiency might affect brain function by reducing mental alertness and impairing executive brain function [1,8,28]. In addition, a low-boron diet (0.25 mg boron/2,000 kcal) might elevate urinary calcium and magnesium excretion and lower serum concentrations of estrogen in postmenopausal women [8,29]. Low boron intakes (0.23 mg boron/2,000 kcal) also appear to reduce plasma calcium and serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D levels and raise serum calcitonin and osteocalcin levels in men and women [8]; these changes could affect bone mineral density.
Boron and Health

This section focuses on three health areas in which boron might be involved: osteoarthritis, bone health, and cancer.
Osteoarthritis

Observational evidence combined with the findings from a few small clinical studies in humans suggests that boron might be helpful for reducing the symptoms of osteoarthritis, possibly by inhibiting inflammation [3,30-33].

In a small pilot study that compared 6 mg boron per day for 8 weeks with placebo, the supplements reduced symptoms of osteoarthritis in 20 participants younger than 75 years (mean age about 65 years) [33]. Another 8-week study in 20 patients with mild to moderate or severe osteoarthritis found that 6 mg/day boron as calcium fructoborate for mild to moderate osteoarthritis or 12 mg/day boron for severe disease reduced joint rigidity and the use of ibuprofen for pain and increased mobility and flexibility [31]. However, this study was very small and not blinded or placebo controlled.

A subsequent double-blind, placebo-controlled trial examined the effects of 1.5, 3, or 6 mg/day boron (as calcium fructoborate) for 2 weeks on inflammatory biomarkers (e.g., C-reactive protein and fibrinogen) in 60 participants with osteoarthritis age 59–68 years [30]. Supplementation significantly reduced inflammatory markers. In another double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial, supplementation with 6 mg/day boron (as calcium fructoborate) for 2 weeks significantly reduced knee discomfort in 60 adults (mean age 50 years) with self-reported knee discomfort [34].

These findings suggest that boron, particularly as calcium fructoborate, might hold promise for reducing osteoarthritis symptoms, but confirmation is needed from additional controlled trials.
Bone health

Boron might be important for bone growth and formation, possibly by affecting osteoblast and/or osteoclast activity or by influencing serum steroid hormone levels and calcium metabolism [4,6,11,32]. Animal studies indicate that boron deficiency causes abnormal limb development; delayed maturation of growth plates; and decreased bone strength, bone volume fraction, and trabecular thickness [6,35].

Comparisons of animals receiving boron supplementation with animals that consume usual or small amounts of boron show that the supplementation improves some measures of bone strength [36-38]. However, in an observational study in 134 Korean women (average age 41 years), boron intakes (mean of 0.9 mg/day) were not significantly correlated with bone mineral density in the lumbar spine or femoral regions [39].

In a placebo-controlled clinical trial of 17 female athletes (mean age 19.8 years) and 11 sedentary females (mean age 20.3 years), 3 mg/day boron supplementation for 10 months significantly reduced serum phosphorus levels and increased serum magnesium levels in sedentary females; such changes are often associated with increased bone mineral density [40]. However, supplementation in this study did not directly affect bone mineral density.

Additional research is needed to determine whether boron supplementation affects bone health in humans.
Cancer

Preliminary evidence suggests that dietary boron intake might affect cancer risk. Several observational studies found that boron intakes are inversely associated with prostate cancer risk in men and with lung and cervical cancer risk in women [1,9,41-44]. For example, in a case control study of 763 women with lung cancer and 838 healthy women, those in the lowest quartile of boron intake (less than 0.78 mg/day) had almost twice the risk of lung cancer of those in the highest quartile (more than 1.25 mg/day) [44]. An observational study in Turkey evaluated two criteria for prostate cancer risk, prostate size and prostate specific antigen (PSA) levels. Men with higher boron intakes (about 6 mg/day) had significantly smaller prostate glands than men who consumed less boron (0.64–0.88 mg/day) [45]. However, PSA levels did not differ significantly between the two groups.

No clinical trials have evaluated the effects of boron on cancer prevention or treatment. More research is needed to understand the effects, if any, of boron on cancer.
Health Risks from Excessive Boron

No data are available on adverse effects of high boron intakes from food or water [2].

Symptoms associated with accidental consumption of boric acid or borax (sodium borate), contained in some household cleaning products and pesticides, include nausea, gastrointestinal discomfort, vomiting, diarrhea, skin flushing, rash, excitation, convulsions, depression, and vascular collapse [2,6,46]. The amount of boron consumed in people who accidentally consumed boron ranged from 18 to 9,713 mg, and most were children younger than 6 years [46]. Boron toxicity can also cause headache, hypothermia, restlessness, weariness, renal injury, dermatitis, alopecia, anorexia, and indigestion. In infants, high boron intakes have caused anemia, seizures, erythema, and thin hair [9]. Extremely high doses of boron can be fatal; for example, 15,000 to 20,000 mg can cause death in adults [6,9].

The FNB established boron ULs for healthy individuals based on levels associated with reproductive and developmental effects in animals [2].
Table 2: Tolerable Upper Intake Levels (ULs) for Boron Age 	Male 	Female 	Pregnancy 	Lactation
Birth to 6 months 	None established* 	None established* 		
7–12 months 	None established* 	None established* 		
1–3 years 	3 mg 	3 mg 		
4–8 years 	6 mg 	6 mg 		
9–13 years 	11 mg 	11 mg 		
14–18 years 	17 mg 	17 mg 	17 mg 	17 mg
19+ years 	20 mg 	20 mg 	20 mg 	20 mg

* Breast milk, formula, and food should be the only sources of boron for infants.
Interactions with Medications

Boron is not known to have any clinically relevant interactions with medications.
Boron and Healthful Diets

The federal government's 2020–2025 Dietary Guidelines for Americans notes that "Because foods provide an array of nutrients and other components that have benefits for health, nutritional needs should be met primarily through foods. ... In some cases, fortified foods and dietary supplements are useful when it is not possible otherwise to meet needs for one or more nutrients (e.g., during specific life stages such as pregnancy)."

For more information about building a healthy dietary pattern, refer to the Dietary Guidelines for Americans and the USDA's MyPlate.

The Dietary Guidelines for Americans describes a healthy dietary pattern as one that

    Includes a variety of vegetables; fruits; grains (at least half whole grains); fat-free and low-fat milk, yogurt, and cheese; and oils.
        Many fruits are rich sources of boron. Potatoes, milk, and milk products also contain boron.
    Includes a variety of protein foods such as lean meats; poultry; eggs; seafood; beans, peas, and lentils; nuts and seeds; and soy products.
        Peanuts and other legumes contain boron.
    Limits foods and beverages higher in added sugars, saturated fat, and sodium.
    Limits alcoholic beverages.
    Stays within your daily calorie needs.

References

    Nielsen FH, Eckhert CD. Boron. Adv Nutr 2019; In press. [PubMed abstract]
    Institute of Medicine. Food and Nutrition Board. Dietary Reference Intakes for Vitamin A, Vitamin K, Arsenic, Boron, Chromium, Copper, Iodine, Iron, Manganese, Molybdenum, Nickel, Silicon, Vanadium, and Zinc Washington, DC: National Academy Press; 2001.
    Nielsen FH. Update on human health effects of boron. J Trace Elem Med Biol 2014;28:383-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Nielsen FH. Manganese, Molybdenum, Boron, Chromium, and Other Trace Elements. In: John W. Erdman Jr. IAM, Steven H. Zeisel, ed. Present Knowledge in Nutrition. 10th ed: Wiley-Blackwell; 2012:586-607.
    Naghii MR, Mofid M, Asgari AR, Hedayati M, Daneshpour MS. Comparative effects of daily and weekly boron supplementation on plasma steroid hormones and proinflammatory cytokines. J Trace Elem Med Biol 2011;25:54-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Hunt C. Boron. In: Coates PM BJ, Blackman MR, Cragg GM, Levine M, Moss J, White JD, ed. Encyclopedia of Dietery Supplements. New York informat healthcare; 2010:82-9.
    Eckhert CD. Trace Elements. In: A. Catharine Ross BC, Robert J. Cousins, Katherine L. Tucker, Thomas R. Ziegler, ed. Modern Nutrition in Health and Disease. 11th ed. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2014:248-51.
    World Health Organization. Boron. In: Trace elements in human nutrition and health. Geneva, 1996.
    Uluisik I, Karakaya HC, Koc A. The importance of boron in biological systems. J Trace Elem Med Biol 2018;45:156-62. [PubMed abstract]
    Khaliq H, Juming Z, Ke-Mei P. The Physiological Role of Boron on Health. Biol Trace Elem Res 2018;186:31-51. [PubMed abstract]
    Hunt CD. Dietary boron: progress in establishing essential roles in human physiology. J Trace Elem Med Biol 2012;26:157-60. [PubMed abstract]
    Kobylewski SE, Henderson KA, Yamada KE, Eckhert CD. Activation of the EIF2alpha/ATF4 and ATF6 Pathways in DU-145 Cells by Boric Acid at the Concentration Reported in Men at the US Mean Boron Intake. Biol Trace Elem Res 2017;176:278-93. [PubMed abstract]
    Yamada KE, Eckhert CD. Boric Acid Activation of eIF2alpha and Nrf2 Is PERK Dependent: a Mechanism that Explains How Boron Prevents DNA Damage and Enhances Antioxidant Status. Biol Trace Elem Res 2019;188:2-10. [PubMed abstract]
    Hunter JM, Nemzer BV, Rangavajla N, Bita A, Rogoveanu OC, Neamtu J, et al. The Fructoborates: Part of a Family of Naturally Occurring Sugar-Borate Complexes-Biochemistry, Physiology, and Impact on Human Health: a Review. Biol Trace Elem Res 2019;188:11-25. [PubMed abstract]
    Rainey CJ, Nyquist LA, Christensen RE, Strong PL, Culver BD, Coughlin JR. Daily boron intake from the American diet. J Am Diet Assoc 1999;99:335-40. [PubMed abstract]
    Sutherland B, Strong P, King JC. Determining human dietary requirements for boron. Biol Trace Elem Res 1998;66:193-204. [PubMed abstract]
    Samman S, Naghii MR, Lyons Wall PM, Verus AP. The nutritional and metabolic effects of boron in humans and animals. Biol Trace Elem Res 1998;66:227-35. [PubMed abstract]
    Meacham SL, Hunt CD. Dietary boron intakes of selected populations in the United States. Biol Trace Elem Res 1998;66:65-78. [PubMed abstract]
    Hunt CD, Shuler TR, Mullen LM. Concentration of boron and other elements in human foods and personal-care products. J Am Diet Assoc 1991;91:558-68. [PubMed abstract]
    Hunt CD, Meacham SL. Aluminum, boron, calcium, copper, iron, magnesium, manganese, molybdenum, phosphorus, potassium, sodium, and zinc: concentrations in common western foods and estimated daily intakes by infants; toddlers; and male and female adolescents, adults, and seniors in the United States. J Am Diet Assoc 2001;101:1058-60. [PubMed abstract]
    Tanaka M, Fujiwara T. Physiological roles and transport mechanisms of boron: perspectives from plants. Pflugers Arch 2008;456:671-7. [PubMed abstract]
    World Health Organization IPoCS. Boron. In: Environmental Health Criteria 204. Geneva. 1998.
    Anderson RR. Comparison of trace elements in milk of four species. J Dairy Sci 1992;75:3050-5. [PubMed abstract]
    Murray FJ. A human health risk assessment of boron (boric acid and borax) in drinking water. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol 1995;22:221-30. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Department of Agriculture and Agricultural Research Service. FoodData Central. 2019.
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Food Labeling: Revision of the Nutrition and Supplement Facts Labels. 2016.
    National Institutes of Health. Dietary Supplement Label Database. 2019.
    Penland JG. Dietary boron, brain function, and cognitive performance. Environ Health Perspect 1994;102 Suppl 7:65-72. [PubMed abstract]
    Nielsen FH, Hunt CD, Mullen LM, Hunt JR. Effect of dietary boron on mineral, estrogen, and testosterone metabolism in postmenopausal women. Faseb j 1987;1:394-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Scorei R, Mitrut P, Petrisor I, Scorei I. A double-blind, placebo-controlled pilot study to evaluate the effect of calcium fructoborate on systemic inflammation and dyslipidemia markers for middle-aged people with primary osteoarthritis. Biol Trace Elem Res 2011;144:253-63. [PubMed abstract]
    Miljkovic D, Scorei RI, Cimpoiasu VM, Scorei ID. Calcium Fructoborate: Plant-Based Dietary Boron for Human Nutrition. Journal of Dietary Supplements 2009;6:211-26. [PubMed abstract]
    Mogosanu GD, Bita A, Bejenaru LE, Bejenaru C, Croitoru O, Rau G, et al. Calcium Fructoborate for Bone and Cardiovascular Health. Biol Trace Elem Res 2016;172:277-81. [PubMed abstract]
    Newnham RE. Essentiality of boron for healthy bones and joints. Environ Health Perspect 1994;102 Suppl 7:83-5. [PubMed abstract]
    Pietrzkowski Z, Phelan MJ, Keller R, Shu C, Argumedo R, Reyes-Izquierdo T. Short-term efficacy of calcium fructoborate on subjects with knee discomfort: a comparative, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical study. Clin Interv Aging 2014;9:895-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Nielsen FH, Stoecker BJ. Boron and fish oil have different beneficial effects on strength and trabecular microarchitecture of bone. J Trace Elem Med Biol 2009;23:195-203. [PubMed abstract]
    Armstrong TA, Spears JW, Crenshaw TD, Nielsen FH. Boron supplementation of a semipurified diet for weanling pigs improves feed efficiency and bone strength characteristics and alters plasma lipid metabolites. J Nutr 2000;130:2575-81. [PubMed abstract]
    Chapin RE, Ku WW, Kenney MA, McCoy H, Gladen B, Wine RN, et al. The effects of dietary boron on bone strength in rats. Fundam Appl Toxicol 1997;35:205-15. [PubMed abstract]
    Dessordi R, Spirlandeli AL, Zamarioli A, Volpon JB, Navarro AM. Boron supplementation improves bone health of non-obese diabetic mice. J Trace Elem Med Biol 2017;39:169-75. [PubMed abstract]
    Kim MH, Bae YJ, Lee YS, Choi MK. Estimation of boron intake and its relation with bone mineral density in free-living Korean female subjects. Biol Trace Elem Res 2008;125:213-22. [PubMed abstract]
    Meacham SL, Taper LJ, Volpe SL. Effects of boron supplementation on bone mineral density and dietary, blood, and urinary calcium, phosphorus, magnesium, and boron in female athletes. Environ Health Perspect 1994;102 Suppl 7:79-82. [PubMed abstract]
    Korkmaz M, Uzgoren E, Bakirdere S, Aydin F, Ataman OY. Effects of dietary boron on cervical cytopathology and on micronucleus frequency in exfoliated buccal cells. Environ Toxicol 2007;22:17-25. [PubMed abstract]
    Scorei IR. Calcium fructoborate: plant-based dietary boron as potential medicine for cancer therapy. Front Biosci (Schol Ed) 2011;3:205-15. [PubMed abstract]
    Cui Y, Winton MI, Zhang ZF, Rainey C, Marshall J, De Kernion JB, et al. Dietary boron intake and prostate cancer risk. Oncol Rep 2004;11:887-92. [PubMed abstract]
    Mahabir S, Spitz MR, Barrera SL, Dong YQ, Eastham C, Forman MR. Dietary boron and hormone replacement therapy as risk factors for lung cancer in women. Am J Epidemiol 2008;167:1070-80. [PubMed abstract]
    Muezzinoglu T, Korkmaz M, Nese N, Bakirdere S, Arslan Y, Ataman OY, et al. Prevalence of prostate cancer in high boron-exposed population: a community-based study. Biol Trace Elem Res 2011;144:49-57. [PubMed abstract]
    Litovitz TL, Klein-Schwartz W, Oderda GM, Schmitz BF. Clinical manifestations of toxicity in a series of 784 boric acid ingestions. Am J Emerg Med 1988;6:209-13. [PubMed abstract]

Disclaimer

This fact sheet by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Office of Dietary Supplements (ODS) provides information that should not take the place of medical advice. We encourage you to talk to your health care providers (doctor, registered dietitian, pharmacist, etc.) about your interest in, questions about, or use of dietary supplements and what may be best for your overall health. Any mention in this publication of a specific product or service, or recommendation from an organization or professional society, does not represent an endorsement by ODS of that product, service, or expert advice.

Updated: June 9, 2022

 Calcium: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals (original version)
Calcium: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals
Table of Contents

    Introduction
    Recommended Intakes
    Sources of Calcium
    Calcium Intakes and Status
    Calcium Deficiency
    Groups at Risk of Calcium Inadequacy
    Calcium and Health
    Health Risks from Excessive Calcium
    Interactions with Medications
    Calcium and Healthful Diets
    References
    Disclaimer

Introduction

Calcium, the most abundant mineral in the body, is found in some foods, added to others, present in some medicines (such as antacids), and available as a dietary supplement.

Calcium makes up much of the structure of bones and teeth and allows normal bodily movement by keeping tissue rigid, strong, and flexible [1]. The small ionized pool of calcium in the circulatory system, extracellular fluid, and various tissues mediates blood vessel contraction and dilation, muscle function, blood clotting, nerve transmission, and hormonal secretion [1,2].

Calcium from foods and dietary supplements is absorbed by both active transport and by passive diffusion across the intestinal mucosa [1,3]. Active transport is responsible for most absorption when calcium intakes are lower, and passive diffusion accounts for an increasing proportion of calcium absorption as intakes rise. Vitamin D is required for calcium to be absorbed in the gut by active transport and to maintain adequate calcium levels in the blood [1].
Assessing calcium status

Because almost all calcium in the body is stored in the skeleton, a dual x-ray absorptiometry scan of bone mineral density can assess a person’s cumulative calcium status over their lifetime. Total calcium levels can be measured in serum or plasma, but these levels are not a good reflection of an individual’s calcium status.

Almost all calcium in the body (98%) is stored in the bones, and the body uses the bones as a reservoir for, and source of, calcium to maintain calcium homeostasis [1]. More than 99% of calcium in the body is in the form of calcium hydroxyapatite, an inorganic matrix of calcium and phosphate that is stored in the bones and teeth [1,4,5]. Unlike teeth, bone undergoes continuous remodeling, with constant resorption and deposition of calcium into new bone [4]. Bone remodeling is required to change bone size during growth, repair damage, maintain serum calcium levels, and provide a source of other minerals [4].

At birth, the body contains about 26 to 30 grams (g) calcium. This amount rises quickly after birth, reaching about 1,200 g in women and 1,400 g in men by adulthood [1]. These levels remain constant in men, but they start to drop in women as a result of increases in bone remodeling due to decreased estrogen production at the start of menopause [1].

An inverse relationship exists between calcium intake and absorption. Absorption of calcium from food is about 45% at intakes of 200 milligrams (mg)/day but only 15% when intakes are higher than 2,000 mg/day [6]. Age can also affect the absorption of dietary calcium [1,4]. Net absorption of dietary calcium is as high as 60% in infants and young children, who need substantial amounts to build bone, but it decreases to about 25% in adulthood and continues to decline with age [1].

Total calcium levels can be measured in serum or plasma; serum levels are typically 8.8 to 10.4 mg/deciliter (dL) (2.2 to 2.6 millimoles per liter [mmol/L]) in healthy people [1,7]. However, serum levels do not reflect nutritional status because of their tight homeostatic control [4]. Levels of ionized (or free) calcium, the biologically active form, in serum are also used to measure calcium status. The normal range of ionized calcium in healthy people is 4.6 to 5.3 mg/dL (1.15 to 1.33 mmol/L) [7]. Dual x-ray absorptiometry testing of bone mineral density can be used to assess cumulative calcium status over the lifetime because the skeleton stores almost all calcium in the body [3].
Recommended Intakes

The Food and Nutrition Board at the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine has established Recommended Dietary Allowances and Adequate Intakes for calcium. These values range from 1,000 to 1,200 mg for adults and from 200 to 1,300 mcg for infants, children, and adolescents, depending on age.

Intake recommendations for calcium and other nutrients are provided in the Dietary Reference Intakes (DRIs) developed by the Food and Nutrition Board (FNB) at the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine [1]. DRI is the general term for a set of reference values used for planning and assessing nutrient intakes of healthy people. These values, which vary by age and sex, include the following:

    Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA): Average daily level of intake sufficient to meet the nutrient requirements of nearly all (97%–98%) healthy individuals; often used to plan nutritionally adequate diets for individuals
    Adequate Intake (AI): Intake at this level is assumed to ensure nutritional adequacy; established when evidence is insufficient to develop an RDA
    Estimated Average Requirement (EAR): Average daily level of intake estimated to meet the requirements of 50% of healthy individuals; usually used to assess the nutrient intakes of groups of people and to plan nutritionally adequate diets for them; can also be used to assess the nutrient intakes of individuals
    Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL): Maximum daily intake unlikely to cause adverse health effects

Table 1 lists the current RDAs for calcium [1]. For adults, the main criterion that the FNB used to establish the RDAs was the amount needed to promote bone maintenance and neutral calcium balance. For infants age 0 to 12 months, the FNB established an AI that is equivalent to the mean intake of calcium in healthy, breastfed infants. For children and adolescents, the RDAs are based on intakes associated with bone accumulation and positive calcium balance.
Table 1: Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDAs) for Calcium in Milligrams (mg) [1] Age 	Male 	Female 	Pregnant 	Lactating
0–6 months* 	200 mg 	200 mg 		
7–12 months* 	260 mg 	260 mg 		
1–3 years 	700 mg 	700 mg 		
4–8 years 	1,000 mg 	1,000 mg 		
9–13 years 	1,300 mg 	1,300 mg 		
14–18 years 	1,300 mg 	1,300 mg 	1,300 mg 	1,300 mg
19–50 years 	1,000 mg 	1,000 mg 	1,000 mg 	1,000 mg
51–70 years 	1,000 mg 	1,200 mg 		
>70 years 	1,200 mg 	1,200 mg 		

*Adequate Intake (AI)
Sources of Calcium
Food

Milk, yogurt, and cheese contain high amounts of calcium. Some nondairy foods also contain calcium, including certain vegetables (e.g., kale, broccoli, Chinese cabbage) and canned sardines and salmon with bones. In addition, some nondairy foods, such as many fruit juices, milk substitutes, tofu, and cereals, are fortified with calcium. The absorption of calcium varies depending on the type of food; absorption from dairy products and fortified foods is about 30%, while absorption from certain plants may be much lower due to the presence of compounds that form indigestible salts with calcium.

Milk, yogurt, and cheese are rich natural sources of calcium [1]. In the United States, approximately 72% of calcium intakes come from dairy products and foods with added dairy ingredients [1]. Nondairy sources include canned sardines and salmon with bones as well as certain vegetables, such as kale, broccoli, and Chinese cabbage (bok choi). Most grains do not have high amounts of calcium unless they are fortified. However, they contribute to calcium intakes, even though they contain small amounts of calcium, because people consume them frequently [1]. In the United States, foods that are fortified with calcium include many fruit juices and drinks, milk substitutes (e.g., soy and almond beverages), tofu, and ready-to-eat cereals [1,8]. Calcium citrate malate is a well-absorbed form of calcium used in some fortified juices [3].

Calcium absorption varies by type of food. The absorption of calcium from dairy products and fortified foods is about 30% [1]. Certain compounds in plants (e.g., oxalic acid, phytic acid) can decrease calcium absorption by forming indigestible salts with calcium [3]. As a result, absorption of calcium is only 5% for spinach, whereas it is much higher, at 27%, for milk [3]. In addition to spinach, foods with high levels of oxalic acid include collard greens, sweet potatoes, rhubarb, and beans [1]. The bioavailability of calcium from other plants that do not contain these compounds—including broccoli, kale, and cabbage—is similar to that of milk, although the amount of calcium per serving is much lower [3]. When people eat many different types of foods, these interactions with oxalic or phytic acid probably have little or no nutritional consequences. Net absorption of dietary calcium is also reduced to a small extent by intakes of caffeine and phosphorus and to a greater extent by low status of vitamin D [9-11].

A variety of foods and their calcium content are listed in Table 2.
Table 2: Calcium Content of Selected Foods [12] Food 	Milligrams (mg)
per serving 	Percent DV*
Yogurt, plain, low fat, 8 ounces 	415 	32
Orange juice, calcium fortified, 1 cup 	349 	27
Yogurt, fruit, low fat, 8 ounces 	344 	27
Mozzarella, part skim, 1.5 ounces 	333 	26
Sardines, canned in oil, with bones, 3 ounces 	325 	25
Milk, nonfat, 1 cup** 	299 	23
Soymilk, calcium fortified, 1 cup 	299 	23
Milk, whole (3.25% milk fat), 1 cup** 	276 	21
Tofu, firm, made with calcium sulfate, ½ cup*** 	253 	19
Salmon, pink, canned, solids with bones, 3 ounces 	181 	14
Cottage cheese, 1% milk fat, 1 cup 	138 	11
Tofu, soft, made with calcium sulfate, ½ cup*** 	138 	11
Soybeans, cooked, ½ cup 	131 	10
Breakfast cereals, fortified with 10% of the DV for calcium, 1 serving 	130 	10
Spinach, boiled, drained, ½ cup 	123 	9
Frozen yogurt, vanilla, soft serve, ½ cup 	103 	8
Turnip greens, fresh, boiled, ½ cup 	99 	8
Kale, fresh, cooked, 1 cup 	94 	7
Chia seeds, 1 tablespoon 	76 	6
Chinese cabbage (bok choi), raw, shredded, 1 cup 	74 	6
Beans, pinto, canned, drained, ½ cup 	54 	4
Tortilla, corn, one, 6” diameter 	46 	4
Sour cream, reduced fat, 2 tablespoons 	31 	2
Bread, whole wheat, 1 slice 	30 	2
Kale, raw, chopped, 1 cup 	24 	2
Broccoli, raw, ½ cup 	21 	2
Apple, golden delicious, with skin, 1 medium 	10 	0
* DV = Daily Value. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) developed DVs to help consumers compare the nutrient contents of foods and dietary supplements within the context of a total diet. The DV for calcium is 1,300 mg for adults and children age 4 years and older [13]. FDA requires food labels to list calcium content. Foods providing 20% or more of the DV are considered to be high sources of a nutrient, but foods providing lower percentages of the DV also contribute to a healthful diet.
** Calcium content varies slightly by fat content; the more fat in the food, the less calcium it contains.
*** Calcium content is for tofu processed with a calcium salt. Tofu processed with other salts does not provide significant amounts of calcium.

The U.S. Department of Agriculture’s (USDA’s) FoodData Central lists the nutrient content of many foods and provides a comprehensive list of foods containing calcium arranged by nutrient content and by food name.
Dietary supplements

Many dietary supplements contain calcium, usually in the form of calcium carbonate or calcium citrate. The percentage of calcium that is absorbed from supplements depends on a number of factors, including the form of the calcium and the total amount of elemental calcium consumed at one time.

Calcium is available in many dietary supplements, including multivitamin/mineral products and supplements containing calcium only or calcium plus vitamin D [14]. The amounts of calcium in supplements vary widely; multivitamin/mineral supplements commonly contain about 200 to 300 mg, and common amounts in calcium or calcium plus vitamin D supplements are 500 or 600 mg [14].

The two most common forms of calcium in supplements are calcium carbonate and calcium citrate [1]. In people with low levels of stomach acid, the solubility rate of calcium carbonate is lower, which could reduce the absorption of calcium from calcium carbonate supplements unless they are taken with a meal [3]. Calcium citrate is less dependent on stomach acid for absorption than calcium carbonate, so it can be taken without food [1]. In general, however, absorption of calcium supplements is greater when they are taken with food, regardless of whether the user’s gastric acid is low [3]. Other calcium forms in supplements include calcium sulfate, ascorbate, microcrystalline hydroxyapatite, gluconate, lactate, and phosphate [14].

The forms of calcium in supplements contain varying amounts of elemental calcium. For example, calcium carbonate is 40% calcium by weight, whereas calcium citrate is 21% calcium [1]. Elemental calcium is listed in the Supplement Facts panel, so consumers do not need to calculate the amount of calcium supplied by various forms of calcium in supplements.

The percentage of calcium absorbed from supplements, as with that from foods, depends not only on the source of calcium but also on the total amount of elemental calcium consumed at one time; as the amount increases, the percentage absorbed decreases. Absorption from supplements is highest with doses of 500 mg or less [15]. For example, the body absorbs about 36% of a 300 mg calcium dose and 28% of a 1,000 mg dose [16].

Some individuals who take calcium supplements might experience gastrointestinal side effects, including gas, bloating, constipation, or a combination of these symptoms. Calcium carbonate appears to cause more of these side effects than calcium citrate, especially in older adults who have lower levels of stomach acid [1]. Symptoms can be alleviated by switching to a supplement containing a different form of calcium, taking smaller calcium doses more often during the day, or taking the supplement with meals.
Medicines

Certain over-the-counter antacid products contain calcium.

Because of its ability to neutralize stomach acid, calcium carbonate is contained in some over-the-counter antacid products, such as Tums and Rolaids. Depending on its strength, each chewable pill or soft chew provides about 270 to 400 mg of calcium [14].
Calcium Intakes and Status

According to data from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, many people in the United States consume less than the recommended amounts of calcium. Non-Hispanic Blacks and non-Hispanic Asians, as well as people living in poverty, are more likely than other populations to have inadequate calcium intakes.

A substantial proportion of people in the United States consume less than recommended amounts of calcium. An analysis of 2007–2010 data from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) found that 49% of children age 4 to18 years and 39% of all individuals age 4 and older consume less than the EAR for calcium from foods and supplements [17].

Average daily intakes of calcium from foods and beverages are 1,083 mg for men age 20 and older and 842 mg for women [18]. For children age 2 to 19 years, mean daily intakes of calcium from foods and beverages range from 965 to 1,015 mg [18]. Approximately 22% of men, 32% of women, and 4% to 8% of children take a dietary supplement containing calcium [18]. Average daily calcium intakes from both foods and supplements are 1,156 mg for men, 1,009 mg for women, and 968 to 1,020 mg for children [18].

According to 2009–2012 NHANES data, rates of calcium inadequacy (intakes below the EAR) are higher among non-Hispanic Blacks and non-Hispanic Asians (47%–48%) than among Hispanics (30%) and non-Hispanic Whites (24%) in the United States [19]. Poverty is also associated with a higher risk of inadequacy. NHANES data from 2007 to 2014 show that the risk of inadequate calcium intakes (less than 800 to 1,100 mg) is 11.6% higher among adults age 50 and older in households earning less than $20,000 per year than in other households [20].
Calcium Deficiency

Calcium deficiency can lead to osteoporosis, which causes weak, fragile bones and increases the risk of falls and fractures. It can also cause rickets in children and osteomalacia in children and adults, although these conditions are more commonly caused by vitamin D deficiency.

Calcium deficiency can reduce bone strength and lead to osteoporosis, which is characterized by fragile bones and an increased risk of falling [1]. Calcium deficiency can also cause rickets in children and other bone disorders in adults, although these disorders are more commonly caused by vitamin D deficiency. In children with rickets, the growth cartilage does not mineralize normally, which can lead to irreversible changes in the skeletal structure [1]. Another effect of chronic calcium deficiency is osteomalacia, or defective bone mineralization and bone softening, which can occur in adults and children [1]. For rickets and osteomalacia, the requirements for calcium and vitamin D appear to be interrelated in that the lower the serum vitamin D level (measured as 25-hydroxyvitamin D [25(OH)D]), the more calcium is needed to prevent these diseases [21].

Hypocalcemia (serum calcium level <8.5 mg/dL [2.12 mmol/L] or an ionized calcium level <4.61 mg/dL [1.15 mmol/L]) is usually a result of a vitamin D or magnesium deficiency, impaired parathyroid hormone production leading to hypoparathyroidism, impaired bone resorption of calcium, critical illness, or use of certain medications (e.g., bisphosphonates, cisplatin, or proton pump inhibitors) [22,23]. Hypocalcemia can be asymptomatic, especially when it is mild or chronic [23]. When signs and symptoms do occur, they can range widely because low serum calcium levels can affect most organs and symptoms [24]. The most common symptom is increased neuromuscular irritability, including perioral numbness, tingling in the hands and feet, and muscle spasms [23]. More severe signs and symptoms can include renal calcification or injury; brain calcification; neurologic symptoms (e.g., depression, bipolar disorder); cataracts; congestive heart failure; paresthesia; seizures; and, in rare cases, coma [22,24].
Groups at Risk of Calcium Inadequacy

Certain groups of people are more likely than others to have calcium inadequacy. These include postmenopausal women and individuals who avoid dairy products.

The following groups are among those most likely to get inadequate amounts of calcium.
Postmenopausal women

Menopause leads to bone loss because decreases in estrogen production reduce calcium absorption and increase urinary calcium loss and calcium resorption from bone [1]. On average, women lose approximately 1% of their bone mineral density (BMD) per year after menopause [25]. Over time, these changes lead to decreased bone mass and fragile bones [1]. About 30% of postmenopausal women in the United States and Europe have osteoporosis, and at least 40% of those with this condition develop at least one fragility fracture (a fracture that occurs after minor trauma, such as a fall from standing height or lower) [26]. The calcium RDA is 1,200 mg for women older than 50 years (vs. 1,000 mg for younger women) to lessen bone loss after menopause [1].
Individuals who avoid dairy products

People with lactose intolerance, those with an allergy to milk, and those who avoid eating dairy products (including vegans) have a higher risk of inadequate calcium intakes because dairy products are rich sources of calcium [1,27]. Options for increasing calcium intakes in individuals with lactose intolerance include consuming lactose-free or reduced-lactose dairy products, which contain the same amounts of calcium as regular dairy products [1,3]. Those who avoid dairy products because of allergies or for other reasons can obtain calcium from nondairy sources, such as some vegetables, canned fish with bones, or fortified foods [1]. However, these individuals typically need to eat foods fortified with calcium or take supplements to obtain recommended amounts [28].
Calcium and Health

This section focuses on six health conditions and diseases in which calcium might play a role: bone health in older adults, cancer, cardiovascular disease (CVD), preeclampsia, weight management, and metabolic syndrome.
Bone health in older adults

Age-related bone loss can lead to osteoporosis and an increased risk of bone fractures. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration has approved a health claim for the use of supplements that contain calcium and vitamin D to reduce the risk of osteoporosis in older adults. However, not all clinical trials have found that these supplements improve bone health or reduce the risk of fractures in this population.

Bone is constantly being remodeled. Declining levels of estrogen in women during menopause and for approximately 5 years afterward lead to rates of bone resorption that are higher than rates of bone formation, resulting in a rapid decrease in bone mass [7]. Over time, postmenopausal women can develop osteoporosis, in which bone strength is compromised because of lower BMD and bone quality [1]. Age-related bone loss can also occur in men and lead to osteoporosis, but fracture risk tends to increase in older men about 5 to 10 years later than in older women [1]. Osteoporosis increases the risk of fractures, especially of the hip, vertebrae, and forearms [1,7].

FDA has approved a health claim for the use of supplements containing calcium and vitamin D to reduce the risk of osteoporosis [29]. However, not all research supports this claim.
Bone mineral density

Despite the importance of calcium in bone health, observational evidence is mixed on the link between calcium intakes and measures of bone strength in older adults. Support for such a link comes from an analysis of 2001–2006 NHANES cross-sectional data on 2,904 adults age 60 and older (54.6% women) showing an association between higher dietary calcium intakes and greater lumbar spine BMD, but only in women [30]. In contrast, an analysis of baseline data from a randomized trial in Australia in 1,994 women older than 65 years whose average dietary calcium intake was 886 mg/day found no association between quintile of calcium intake and BMD at any site, even after adjustment for such factors as age, physical activity, height, and weight [31]. Results were similar in 698 of the women who were followed for 6 years, even though mean daily intakes of calcium dropped by an average of 40 mg during this period.

Some, but not all, clinical trials have found that calcium supplementation can improve bone health in older adults. A post-hoc analysis of data from a double-blind, randomized controlled trial (RCT) of 1,000 mg elemental calcium in the form of calcium carbonate and 400 International Units (IU) (10 microgram [mcg]) vitamin D3 daily or placebo in 36,282 women age 50 to 79 years enrolled in the Women’s Health Initiative (WHI) found that the supplementation did not prevent height loss after a mean follow-up period of 5.9 years [32]. On average, women lost 1.28 millimeters (mm)/year of height in the supplementation group and 1.26 mm/year in the placebo group. However, a 2-year RCT in 500 healthy postmenopausal women showed that daily intakes of 500 millileters (mL)/day skimmed milk enriched to provide 900 mg calcium and 15 mcg (600 IU) vitamin D led to increased BMD at the femoral neck [33].

Several recent systematic reviews and meta-analyses have found that supplementation with calcium alone or a combination of calcium and vitamin D increases BMD in older adults. For example, a systematic review and meta-analysis included 15 RCTs in postmenopausal women (but did not include the two studies described in the previous paragraph) in 78,206 women, of which 37,412 were in the intervention group and 40,794 were in the control group [34]. Supplementation with both calcium and vitamin D or consumption of dairy products fortified with both nutrients increased total BMD as well as BMD at the lumbar spine, arms, and femoral neck. However, in subgroup analyses, calcium had no effect on femoral neck BMD. Earlier systematic reviews and meta-analyses found a positive relationship between calcium and vitamin D supplementation and increased BMD in older males [35] and between higher calcium intakes from dietary sources or supplements and higher BMD in adults older than 50 [25]. However, whether these BMD increases were clinically significant is not clear.
Fractures

As with the evidence on the link between increased calcium intakes and reductions in BMD loss, the findings of research on the use of calcium supplementation to prevent fractures in older adults are mixed.

For the most part, the observational evidence does not show that increasing calcium intakes reduces the risk of fractures and falls in older adults. For example, a longitudinal cohort study of 1,490 women age 42 to 52 years at baseline who were followed for 10 to 12 years found that fracture risk was not significantly different in calcium supplement users (some of whom also took vitamin D supplements) and nonusers, even though supplement use was associated with less BMD loss throughout the study period [36].

Some clinical trial evidence shows that supplements containing a combination of calcium and vitamin D can reduce the risk of fractures in older adults. For example, a meta-analysis of eight RCTs in 30,970 adults older than 50 years found that 500 to 1,200 mg/day calcium and 400 to 800 IU/day (10 to 20 mcg/day) vitamin D supplementation for 1 to 7 years reduced the risk of total fractures by 15% and hip fractures by 30% [37]. However, findings were negative in another systematic review and meta-analysis that included 14 RCTs of calcium supplementation and 13 trials comparing calcium and vitamin D supplements with hormone therapy, placebo, or no treatment in participants older than 50 years [38]. The results showed that calcium supplementation alone had no effect on risk of hip fracture, and supplementation with both calcium and vitamin D had no effect on risk of hip fracture, nonvertebral fracture, vertebral fracture, or total fracture. Similarly, a systematic review of 11 RCTs in 51,419 adults age 50 and older found that supplementation with vitamin D and calcium for 2 to 7 years had no impact on the risk of total fractures or of hip fractures [39].

The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) concluded with moderate certainty that daily doses of less than 1,000 mg calcium and less than 400 IU (10 mcg) vitamin D do not prevent fractures in postmenopausal women and that the evidence on larger doses of this combination is inadequate to assess the benefits in this population [40]. The USPSTF also determined that the evidence on the benefits of calcium supplementation alone or with vitamin D is inadequate to assess its effect on preventing fractures in men and premenopausal women.

Additional research is needed before conclusions can be drawn about the use of calcium supplements to improve bone health and prevent fractures in older adults.
Cancer

Some evidence suggests that calcium may reduce the risk of certain types of cancer, although the relationship between calcium intake and cancer risk remains unclear. Specifically, some observational studies have reported an association between higher calcium intakes and a lower risk of colorectal cancer, but these findings are not always corroborated by the results of calcium supplementation trials. Consuming high levels of calcium from dairy may be associated with a higher risk of prostate cancer; however, the studies that have evaluated the effects of calcium on the risks for other cancers, such as ovarian or breast cancer, have had mixed results.

Calcium might help reduce the risk of cancer, especially in the colon and rectum [1]. However, the evidence on the relationship between calcium intakes from foods or supplements and different forms of cancer is inconsistent [4].
All-cancer incidence and mortality

Most clinical trial evidence does not support a beneficial effect of calcium supplements on cancer incidence. A 4-year study of 1,500 mg calcium and 2,000 IU (50 mcg) vitamin D or placebo daily for 4 years in 2,303 healthy women age 55 years and older showed that supplementation did not reduce the risk of all types of cancer [41]. The large WHI study described above also found no effect of supplemental calcium and vitamin D on cancer incidence during the 7-year trial [42] and over a long-term median follow-up of 22.3 years [43]. In addition, a meta-analysis of 10 RCTs that included 10,496 individuals who took supplements containing 500 mg calcium or more (without vitamin D) for a mean of 3.9 years found that calcium supplementation did not change the total cancer risk [44]. However, one large clinical trial did find that calcium supplements reduce cancer risk. In this 4-year trial, by the same investigators as the 4-year trial above, 1,179 women age 55 years or older in Nebraska took 1,400 to 1,500 mg calcium alone; 1,400 to 1,500 mg calcium plus 1,100 IU (27.5 mcg) vitamin D3; or placebo daily. Cancer incidence from all causes was 60% lower in women who took the combination and 47% lower in those who took calcium-only supplements than in the placebo group [45]. Some scientists have questioned these findings because of the lack of statistical power (the studies were designed to detect differences in bone health measures, not cancer incidence), details from the investigators on the study sample, and randomization procedures [46,47].

Observational evidence does not support an association between higher calcium intakes and a lower risk of cancer mortality. An analysis of data on 132,823 participants in the Cancer Prevention Study II Nutrition Cohort, who were followed for an average of 17.5 years, found no association between total dietary and supplemental calcium intakes and the risk of cancer-related death or death from lung, colorectal, breast, or prostate cancer in men or women [48]. A systematic review and meta-analysis of 22 observational studies in 2,346,368 participants age 8 and older who were followed for 4.6 to 28 years also found no association between total dietary and supplemental calcium intake and cancer mortality [49].

Results from many, but not all, clinical trials also suggest that supplemental calcium alone or combined with vitamin D does not affect the risk of mortality from all cancers. An RCT in 5,292 adults age 70 years or older (85% women) in the United Kingdom compared the effects of 1,000 mg calcium, 8,000 IU (200 mcg) vitamin D3, both, or placebo for 24 to 62 months [50]. Rates of cancer incidence and cancer mortality did not differ between those who did and those who did not receive calcium supplements. In the WHI trial, 36,282 postmenopausal women were randomly assigned to receive daily supplementation with a combination of 1,000 mg calcium and 400 IU (10 mcg) vitamin D3 or placebo [42]. After an average of 7 years, the risk of cancer mortality did not differ between groups. However, over a long-term median follow-up of 22.3 years, cancer mortality was 7% lower among women who received calcium and vitamin D supplements compared with those who received placebo [43]. The meta-analysis described above of 10 RCTs that administered calcium alone and that included 10,496 individuals found no impact of calcium supplementation on cancer mortality rates [44].
Colorectal cancer

A substantial body of evidence has addressed the role of calcium in preventing colorectal cancer or its precursor, adenomas.

The results of many, but not all, observational studies support a link between higher calcium intakes and a lower risk of colorectal cancer. A cohort study in 77,712 adults found that over a mean of 7.8 years, the highest total intake of dietary and supplemental calcium (median of 1,999 mg/day) was associated with a 26% lower risk of colon cancer than the lowest quintile (587 mg/day) but had no association with the risk of rectal cancer [51]. In a dose-response meta-analysis of 15 prospective cohort studies in 1,415,597 participants (mean total dietary and supplemental calcium intake 250 to 1,900 mg/day) who were followed for 3.3 to 16 years, the risk of colorectal cancer dropped by 8% with each 300 mg/day increase in total calcium intake [52]. Findings were similar for dietary intakes of calcium in two other meta-analyses [53,54].

In spite of the observational evidence supporting an association between higher calcium intakes and lower colorectal cancer risk, clinical trials investigating calcium supplements for the prevention of colorectal cancer or adenomas have had mixed results. A 2013 follow-up study by Cauley and colleagues evaluated outcomes 4.9 years after completion of the 7-year WHI trial of 1,000 mg/day calcium plus 400 IU (10 mcg)/day vitamin D3 or placebo in 36,282 postmenopausal women [55]. Colorectal cancer rates did not differ between groups. In a follow-up study, calcium supplements with or without vitamin D had no effect on the risk of recurrent adenomas in 1,121 participants for an average of 55 months after the administration of 1,200 mg/day calcium, 1,000 IU (25 mcg)/day vitamin D3, or both for 3 or 5 years [56]. However, a systematic review and meta-analysis of four RCTs (not including the 2013 study by Cauley and colleagues) found that daily supplementation with 1,200 to 2,000 mg elemental calcium for 36 to 60 months reduced the likelihood of recurrent adenomas by 11%, although the supplements had no effect on the risk of advanced adenomas [57].
Other cancers

Several observational studies have shown that the risk of prostate cancer might be higher with higher calcium intakes, but possibly only when the calcium comes from dairy foods. In an analysis of data from 2,776 men who participated in the French SU.VI.MAX (Supplementation en Vitamines et Minéraux Antioxydants) prospective study and were followed for an average of 7.7 years, prostate cancer risk was higher with higher calcium intakes [58]. The risk was 2.4 times higher in men in the highest quartile of intake (>1,081 mg/day) than those with the lowest quartile (<725 mg/day). However, in analyses of results for various sources of calcium, only calcium from dairy foods was significantly associated with prostate cancer risk (2.9 times higher in men with intakes >696 mg/day than in those with intakes <354 mg/day); calcium intakes from nondairy sources were not significantly associated with prostate cancer risk. In a systematic review and meta-analysis of nine cohort studies in 750,275 men, the risk of prostate cancer was 2% higher for each 400 mg/day increment in total dietary and supplemental calcium intake, but nondairy and supplemental calcium intakes were not associated with prostate cancer risk [59].

A meta-analysis included 15 epidemiological studies of calcium intake and ovarian cancer risk in 493,415 women who developed 7,453 cases of ovarian cancer [60]. In this meta-analysis, ovarian cancer risk was 20% lower in participants in the highest category of dietary calcium intakes (>820–1,500 mg/day, depending on the study) than the lowest intake category (<362–800 mg/day, depending on the study). However, the difference in risk was not statistically significant when both dietary and supplemental calcium intakes were considered.

For breast cancer, observational studies have had mixed findings on whether higher calcium intakes are associated with a lower risk. A meta-analysis of 11 prospective cohort studies in 872,895 women who developed 26,606 cases of breast cancer over 7 to 25 years found that women with the highest calcium intakes had an 8% lower risk of breast cancer [61]. However, the WHI (described above) found similar incidence rates of invasive breast cancer in the supplement and placebo groups [62].
Conclusion

Additional well-designed randomized trials are needed to determine whether dietary or supplemental calcium intakes increase, decrease, or have no effect on risk of cancer in general or of specific types of cancer, or on cancer mortality.
Cardiovascular disease

According to several large observational studies, people with lower calcium intakes may have an increased risk of hypertension, stroke, and atherosclerosis. However, some prospective cohort studies and randomized controlled trials have found that the use of calcium supplements might actually increase the risk of cardiovascular disease, while other studies have found no link between calcium supplements and cardiovascular disease risk or outcomes. More research is needed to clearly define the associations between dietary calcium and calcium supplements and cardiovascular disease.

Calcium binds fatty acids, so it can reduce lipid absorption and might therefore lower CVD risk [1,4]. However, the findings from research on the role of dietary calcium and calcium supplements in reducing CVD have been mixed, and some evidence indicates that calcium supplements might even increase CVD risk.

Several large observational studies have shown an association between lower calcium intakes and higher risk of hypertension, stroke, and atherosclerosis. For example, an analysis of 1999–2010 NHANES data from 14,408 adults (mean age 54 years) with obesity found that calcium intakes were 10% lower in adults with obesity and hypertension than in those without hypertension [63]. This association was strongest in women, adults age 20 to 44 years, those who did not have diabetes, and especially women age 20 to 44 years. A prospective cohort study that followed 41,514 adults age 40 to 69 years in Australia for 13 years found a 25% lower rate of stroke in adults in the highest calcium intake quartile (mean of 1,076 mg/day) than in the lowest quartile (mean of 641 mg/day) [64]. However, the study found no association between calcium intakes and the risk of CVD mortality or myocardial infarction. The risk of atherosclerosis over 10 years in a study of 5,448 adults age 45 to 84 years was 27% lower in the highest quintile of calcium intake (mean of 2,157 mg/day) than in the lowest quintile (mean of 313 mg/day) [65]. Furthermore, a systematic review and meta-analysis that included 27 observational studies found no consistent dose-response relationships between total, dietary, or supplemental calcium intakes and CVD mortality [66]. Evidence on dose-response relationships between calcium intakes and risk of stroke or stroke mortality was inconsistent.

A diet containing more calcium than the typical U.S. diet because of added low-fat or nonfat dairy products lowered systolic blood pressure by an average of 5.5 millimeters of mercury (mmHg) and diastolic blood pressure by 3.0 mmHg [67]. However, this Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) diet also increases intakes of other nutrients, such as potassium and magnesium, that are associated with reductions in blood pressure, so any independent contribution of calcium cannot be determined.

Some clinical trials have shown that calcium supplements are associated with decreased hypertension risk or decreased cholesterol levels, but others have had more mixed findings. A Cochrane Review of 16 trials in 3,048 adults with a median follow-up period of 3.5 months found that calcium supplementation (typically 1,000 to 2,000 mg/day) reduced systolic blood pressure by 1.43 mmHg and diastolic blood pressure by 0.98 mmHg [68]. Effects were greatest in adults younger than 35 years and with doses higher than 1,500 mg/day calcium. A meta-analysis of 23 RCTs in 4,071 participants showed that calcium supplements providing 162 to 2,000 mg/day (combined with vitamin D in 10 RCTs) for 2 weeks to 5 years was associated with low-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels that were 4.6 mg/dL lower and high-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels that were 1.9 mg/dL higher [69].

Findings were mixed in two analyses of data from the WHI. One analysis of results from 35,983 women age 50 to 79 years who were randomly assigned to receive 1,000 mg/day calcium and 400 IU (10 mcg)/day vitamin D supplements or placebo for 10 years found no reduction in risk of heart failure [70]. However, the calcium and vitamin D supplements were associated with 5% lower heart failure risk in participants who had no pre-existing heart failure risk factors (coronary heart disease, diabetes, or hypertension). In another secondary analysis of data on 16,801 WHI participants, the supplements had no association with atrial fibrillation risk [71]. An analysis of long-term health outcomes from the WHI over a median follow-up of 22.3 years found no effect of calcium and vitamin D supplements on CVD risk [43]. Similarly, an evidence report and systematic review conducted for the USPSTF that included 11 RCTs of vitamin D, calcium, or both for 2 to 7 years in 51,419 adults age 50 years and older found that supplementation with vitamin D alone or combined with calcium had no effect on CVD incidence [39].

In contrast, several prospective cohort studies and RCTs have shown that calcium supplements increase the risk of CVD. A meta-analysis of 14 RCTs (including one study that administered supplements providing 20 mcg [800 IU] vitamin D per day) in 28,935 healthy postmenopausal women found that calcium supplements providing 500 to 2,000 mg/day calcium for 1 to 7 years increased CVD risk by 15% and coronary heart disease risk by 16% [72]. In addition, when 132,823 adults (mean age 63 years) were followed for an average of 17.5 years, the risk of CVD mortality was 22% higher in men with calcium supplement intakes of 1,000 mg/day or more than in those not taking calcium supplements [48]. However, in women, the CVD mortality rate was 16% lower with supplemental calcium intakes of 1,000 mg/day than with no supplemental calcium intakes. An analysis of long-term health outcomes from the WHI over a median follow-up of 22.3 years found that women who received calcium and vitamin D supplements had a 6% higher risk of death from CVD than those who received placebo [43].

Other studies have found no association between calcium supplements and CVD risk or CVD outcomes. Among the 74,245 women age 30 to 55 years who participated in the Nurses’ Health Study, those who took more than 1,000 mg/day calcium supplements did not have a higher risk of CVD than those who took no supplemental calcium during the 24 years of follow-up [73].

An expert panel convened by the National Osteoporosis Foundation and American Society for Preventive Cardiology determined, on the basis of moderate-quality evidence, that calcium intakes with or without vitamin D from foods or supplements neither increase nor decrease the risk of CVD or CVD mortality [74]. The societies therefore concluded that calcium intakes that do not exceed the UL are safe "from a cardiovascular standpoint."
Preeclampsia

Preeclampsia is a leading cause of maternal and neonatal morbidity and mortality in the United States. Calcium supplements might reduce the risk of preeclampsia in pregnant women who have inadequate calcium intakes.

Preeclampsia is defined as hypertension and proteinuria or thrombocytopenia during pregnancy, usually after 20 weeks’ gestation [75]. It is a leading cause of maternal and neonatal morbidity and mortality that affects about 4% of pregnancies in the United States [76].

Calcium supplementation during pregnancy might reduce the risk of preeclampsia, but the benefits might apply only to women with inadequate calcium intakes, and much of this evidence comes from studies with methodological weaknesses [77,78].

A Cochrane Review included 27 RCTs of calcium supplements during pregnancy in 18,064 women to prevent hypertensive disorders and related problems [79]. In the 13 studies—none of which administered vitamin D supplements—that evaluated high doses (at least 1,000 mg/day calcium) in 15,730 women, supplementation reduced the risk of high blood pressure by 35% and, in women with low dietary calcium intakes (<900 mg/day; 8 trials in 10,678 women), it reduced the risk of preeclampsia by 64%. However, the quality of this evidence was low. In 12 trials in 2,334 women, doses of less than 1,000 mg/day (usually 500 mg/day) reduced the risk of high blood pressure by 47% and of preeclampsia by 62%. However, most of these studies recruited women at high risk of preeclampsia and had a high risk of bias. An earlier systematic review and meta-analysis of 10 RCTs in 24,787 women also found that calcium supplementation (1,500–2,000 mg/day) reduced the overall risk of preeclampsia by 38% [80]. The effect was more pronounced among women who had a higher risk of any hypertensive disorder of pregnancy: calcium supplements reduced their risk of preeclampsia by 64%. However, when the analysis was restricted to trials with 4,000 or more women, the effect was no longer statistically significant. An RCT in 1,355 women in Argentina, South Africa, and Zimbabwe also found that 500 mg/day calcium supplementation starting before conception made no difference in the risk of preeclampsia [81,82].

Several professional organizations recommend calcium supplements during pregnancy for women with low calcium intakes to reduce the risk of preeclampsia. For example, the American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology states that daily supplementation with 1,500 to 2,000 mg calcium might reduce the severity of preeclampsia in pregnant women who have calcium intakes of less than 600 mg/day [77]. The World Health Organization recommends 1,500 to 2,000 mg/day calcium for pregnant women with low dietary calcium intakes to reduce preeclampsia risk [83]. The Canadian Hypertensive Disorders of Pregnancy Working Group [84], the International Society for the Study of Hypertension in Pregnancy [85], and the Society of Obstetric Medicine of Australia and New Zealand [86] have similar recommendations.
Weight management

Whether dietary or supplemental calcium intakes affect weight management is unknown. While some studies have reported a lower prevalence of overweight or obesity or a lower risk of gaining weight among people with higher calcium intakes, others have found no link between calcium intakes and factors such as body mass index, body weight, or body fat.

Observational and clinical trial evidence linking higher calcium intakes from dairy products or supplements to lower body weight or less weight gain over time is mixed.

An observational study found an association between higher calcium intakes and lower prevalence of overweight or obesity in 6,696 children (51% male, mean age 6 years) in eight European countries, of whom 2,744 were re-examined 6 years later [87]. The prevalence of overweight or obesity at the 6-year follow-up was lower in boys (16%) and girls (18%) in the highest tertile of calcium intake (664 mg/1,000 kcal for boys and 667 mg/1,000 kcal for girls) than in boys (26%) and girls (25%) in the lowest tertile (249 mg/1,000 kcal for both boys and girls). In contrast, a longitudinal study in 2,159 participants in Portugal who were evaluated at ages 13 and 21 years found no association between total dietary and supplemental calcium intake at age 13 and body mass index (BMI) at age 21 after the analysis was adjusted for energy intake [88]. The study also found no associations between the consumption of dairy foods (milk, yogurt, and cheese) at age 13 and BMI at age 21.

Clinical trials and meta-analyses of RCTs assessing the impact of calcium supplements or increased intakes of calcium from dairy products on prevention of weight gain or promotion of fat loss or weight loss have had mixed results [89-93]. For example, postmenopausal women who took 1,000 mg calcium and 400 IU (10 mcg) vitamin D daily for 3 years in the WHI and whose daily intakes were less than 1,200 mg calcium at baseline were 11% less likely to gain 1 kg of weight or more than those who took placebo during this period [91]. A systematic review and meta-analysis of 41 RCTs that examined the effect of dairy foods or calcium supplements (≥300 mg/day) in 4,802 adults found that higher calcium intakes from dairy foods had no impact on body weight or body fat, although they did reduce body fat when combined with an energy-restricted diet [92]. In addition, calcium supplements had no effect on body weight or body fat.

For additional information on calcium and weight management, see the health professional fact sheet on weight loss.
Metabolic syndrome

A few analyses and one clinical trial have indicated that higher calcium intakes may reduce a person’s risk of developing metabolic syndrome, especially in women, but more evidence is needed to clarify this potential link.

Metabolic syndrome is a set of at least three risk factors for heart disease, stroke, and diabetes—large waistline, high triglyceride level, low high-density lipoprotein cholesterol level, high blood pressure, and high fasting blood sugar level. Some observational evidence links higher calcium intakes with lower risk of metabolic syndrome.

An analysis of 2001–2010 NHANES data on 9,148 adults found that women in the highest quintile (≥1,172 mg/day) of calcium intake, based on 24-hour recall, had a 27% lower risk of metabolic syndrome than those in the lowest quintile (<547 mg/day) [94]. Furthermore, women who met the RDA for calcium for adults (1,000–1,200 mg/day, depending on age) had an 18% lower risk of metabolic syndrome, but the association was not statistically significant in men who met the RDA for calcium. In a meta-analysis of eight cross-sectional studies and two prospective cohort studies in 63,017 participants age 20 years and older, 14,906 participants developed metabolic syndrome [95]. For each 300 mg/day increase in dietary calcium intake, the risk of metabolic syndrome dropped by 7%. Subgroup analyses suggested that the inverse association between dietary calcium intakes and metabolic syndrome risk was stronger in women than men.

Clinical trial evidence on the link between calcium and metabolic syndrome is very limited. In one placebo-controlled clinical trial in Iran in 66 adults who were overweight and had type 2 diabetes and coronary heart disease, supplements of 5 mcg (200 IU) vitamin D, 90 mcg vitamin K, and 500 mg calcium for 12 weeks significantly reduced maximum levels of left carotid intima media thickness and improved metabolic status (including improvements in insulin resistance, insulin concentrations, beta-cell function, and quantitative insulin sensitivity check index) [96].

More evidence, including evidence from well-designed clinical trials, is needed to determine whether higher intakes of calcium can reduce the risk of metabolic syndrome.
Health Risks from Excessive Calcium

Higher intakes of supplemental calcium might increase the risk of kidney stones. According to some research, calcium supplements have the potential to increase the risk of cardiovascular disease. Higher calcium intakes might also increase the risk of prostate cancer. The tolerable upper intake level for calcium ranges from 2,000 mg to 2,500 mg for adults and from 1,000 mg to 3,000 mg for infants, children, and adolescents, depending on age.

Hypercalcemia (serum levels >10.5 mg/dL [2.63 mmol/L]) and hypercalciuria (urinary calcium levels >250 mg/day in women and 275 mg/day in men) are rare in healthy people and usually result from cancer, primary hyperparathyroidism, and other conditions [1,4]. Hypercalcemia and hypercalciuria can cause poor muscle tone, renal insufficiency, hypophosphatemia, constipation, nausea, weight loss, fatigue, polyuria, heart arrhythmias, and a higher risk of CVD mortality [1,4,49].

High calcium intakes might also increase the risk of CVD (see the section on CVD in Calcium and Health section above) [39,63,68,70,71] and prostate cancer (see the Other Cancers in Calcium and Health section above for more details) [58,59], although not all studies confirm these findings.

The ULs for calcium established by the FNB are listed in Table 3. They are based on observational evidence from the WHI showing a link between higher intakes of supplemental calcium (1,000 mg/day for 7 years) and a greater risk of kidney stones [97,98]. However, two subsequent systematic reviews of the evidence from 10 studies in more than 8,000 adults with osteoporosis who took 120 to 1,500 mg supplemental calcium daily for 3 days to 3 years [99] and 11 RCTs in 51,419 adults 50 years and older who took 1,000 to 1,600 mg calcium with or without vitamin D for 2 to 7 years [39] found no such association.
Table 3: Tolerable Upper Intake Levels (ULs) for Calcium in Milligrams (mg) [1] Age 	Male 	Female 	Pregnant 	Lactating
0–6 months 	1,000 mg 	1,000 mg 		
7–12 months 	1,500 mg 	1,500 mg 		
1–3 years 	2,500 mg 	2,500 mg 		
4–8 years 	2,500 mg 	2,500 mg 		
9–13 years 	3,000 mg 	3,000 mg 		
14–18 years 	3,000 mg 	3,000 mg 	3,000 mg 	3,000 mg
19–50 years 	2,500 mg 	2,500 mg 	2,500 mg 	2,500 mg
51–70 years 	2,000 mg 	2,000 mg 		
>70 years 	2,000 mg 	2,000 mg 		
Interactions with Medications

Calcium supplements may interact with medications, and some medications may affect calcium levels. These medications include dolutegravir, levothyroxine, lithium, and quinolone antibiotics.

Calcium supplements have the potential to interact with certain medications, and several types of medications might adversely affect calcium levels. A few examples are provided below. Individuals taking these and other medications on a regular basis should discuss their calcium status with their health care providers.
Dolutegravir

Dolutegravir (Dovato, Tivicay) is an HIV integrase inhibitor used in adults and children. Concomitant use of calcium supplements and dolutegravir can reduce blood levels of dolutegravir substantially, apparently through chelation [100,101]. The labels approved by the FDA for dolutegravir advise patients to take dolutegravir 2 hours before or 6 hours after taking calcium supplements [102,103].
Levothyroxine

Calcium carbonate supplements can interfere with the absorption of levothyroxine (Synthroid, Levoxyl, and others), a thyroid hormone used to treat hypothyroidism and thyroid cancer [104-106]. The FDA-approved label for this medication instructs patients who are taking calcium carbonate supplements to avoid taking levothyroxine within 4 hours of taking the supplement [107].
Lithium

Long-term use of lithium (Eskalith, Lithobid), a treatment for bipolar disorder, can lead to hypercalcemia, and use of both lithium and calcium supplements could increase this risk [108].
Quinolone antibiotics

Simultaneous use of calcium supplements and quinolone antibiotics—such as ciprofloxacin (Cipro), gemifloxacin (Factive), and moxifloxacin (Avelox)—can reduce the absorption of quinolones [109,110]. Taking the antibiotic 2 hours before or 2 hours after calcium supplements prevents this effect [109].
Calcium and Healthful Diets

In general, a person’s nutritional needs should be met primarily through the diet, including fortified foods. Dietary supplements may be useful in cases where it is not possible to meet the needs for specific nutrients through food alone, especially during certain life stages. The Dietary Guidelines for Americans offers a general description of healthy dietary patterns.

The federal government’s 2020–2025 Dietary Guidelines for Americans notes that "Because foods provide an array of nutrients and other components that have benefits for health, nutritional needs should be met primarily through foods....In some cases, fortified foods and dietary supplements are useful when it is not possible otherwise to meet needs for one or more nutrients (e.g., during specific life stages such as pregnancy).

For more information about building a healthy dietary pattern, refer to the Dietary Guidelines for Americans and the USDA's MyPlate.

The Dietary Guidelines for Americans describes a healthy eating pattern as one that

    Includes a variety of vegetables, fruits, whole grains, fat-free or low-fat milk and milk products, and oils.
        Many dairy products, such as milk, cheese, and yogurt, are rich sources of calcium. Some vegetables provide significant amounts of calcium, as do some fortified cereals and juices.
    Includes a variety of protein foods, including seafood, lean meats and poultry, eggs, legumes (beans and peas), nuts, seeds, and soy products.
        Tofu made with calcium salts is a good source of calcium (check the label), as are canned sardines and canned salmon with edible bones.
    Limits foods and beverages higher in added sugars, saturated fat, and sodium.
    Limits alcoholic beverages.
    Stays within your daily calorie needs.

References

    Institute of Medicine. Dietary Reference Intakes for Calcium and Vitamin D. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press; 2011.
    Heaney RP. Calcium. In: Coates PM, Betz JM, Blackman MR, et al., eds. Encyclopedia of Dietary Supplements. 2nd ed. London and New York: Informa Healthcare; 2010:101-6.
    Weaver CM, Heaney RP. Calcium. In: Ross AC, Caballero B, Cousins RJ, Tucker KL, Ziegler TR, eds. Modern Nutrition in Health and Disease. 11th ed. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2014:133-49.
    Weaver CM. Calcium. In: Marriott BP, Birt DF, Stallings VA, Yates AA, eds. Present Knowledge in Nutrition. 11th ed. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Wiley-Blackwell; 2020:321-48.
    Wawrzyniak N, Suliburska J. Nutritional and health factors affecting the bioavailability of calcium: a narrative review. Nutr Rev 2021. [PubMed abstract]
    Fairweather-Tait SJ, Teucher B. Iron and calcium bioavailability of fortified foods and dietary supplements. Nutr Rev 2002;60:360-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Song L. Calcium and bone metabolism indices. Adv Clin Chem 2017;82:1-46. [PubMed abstract]
    Cormick G, Betrán AP, Metz F, Palacios C, Beltrán-Velazquez F, García-Casal MLN, et al. Regulatory and policy-related aspects of calcium fortification of foods. Implications for implementing national strategies of calcium fortification. Nutrients 2020;12. [PubMed abstract]
    Wongdee K, Rodrat M, Teerapornpuntakit J, Krishnamra N, Charoenphandhu N. Factors inhibiting intestinal calcium absorption: hormones and luminal factors that prevent excessive calcium uptake. J Physiol Sci 2019;69:683-96. [PubMed abstract]
    Wikoff D, Welsh BT, Henderson R, Brorby GP, Britt J, Myers E, et al. Systematic review of the potential adverse effects of caffeine consumption in healthy adults, pregnant women, adolescents, and children. Food Chem Toxicol 2017;109:585-648. [PubMed abstract]
    Gallagher JC, Yalamanchili V, Smith LM. The effect of vitamin D on calcium absorption in older women. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2012;97:3550-6. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Department of Agriculture. FoodData Central. 2021.
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Food Labeling: Revision of the Nutrition and Supplement Facts Labels. 2016.
    Office of Dietary Supplements, National Institutes of Health. Dietary Supplement Label Database. 2021.
    Institute of Medicine SCotSEoDR, Intakes,. Dietary Reference Intakes for Calcium, Phosphorus, Magnesium, Vitamin D, and Fluoride. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 1997.
    Heaney RP, Dowell MS, Barger-Lux MJ. Absorption of calcium as the carbonate and citrate salts, with some observations on method. Osteoporos Int 1999;9:19-23. [PubMed abstract]
    Wallace TC, McBurney M, Fulgoni VL, 3rd. Multivitamin/mineral supplement contribution to micronutrient intakes in the United States, 2007-2010. J Am Coll Nutr 2014;33:94-102. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service. What We Eat in America, 2017-2018. 2020.
    Blumberg JB, Frei B, Fulgoni VL, III, Weaver CM, Zeisel SH. Contribution of dietary supplements to nutritional adequacy in race/ethnic population subgroups in the United States. Nutrients 2017;9. [PubMed abstract]
    Marshall K, Teo L, Shanahan C, Legette L, Mitmesser SH. Inadequate calcium and vitamin D intake and osteoporosis risk in older Americans living in poverty with food insecurities. PLoS One 2020;15:e0235042. [PubMed abstract]
    Sempos CT, Durazo-Arvizu RA, Fischer PR, Munns CF, Pettifor JM, Thacher TD. Serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D requirements to prevent nutritional rickets in Nigerian children on a low-calcium diet—a multivariable renanalysis. Am J Clin Nutr 2021;114:231-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Fong J, Khan A. Hypocalcemia: updates in diagnosis and management for primary care. Can Fam Physician 2012;58:158-62. [PubMed abstract]
    Bove-Fenderson E, Mannstadt M. Hypocalcemic disorders. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab 2018;32:639-56. [PubMed abstract]
    Pepe J, Colangelo L, Biamonte F, Sonato C, Danese VC, Cecchetti V, et al. Diagnosis and management of hypocalcemia. Endocrine 2020;69:485-95. [PubMed abstract]
    Tai V, Leung W, Grey A, Reid IR, Bolland MJ. Calcium intake and bone mineral density: systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ 2015;351:h4183. [PubMed abstract]
    Cano A, Chedraui P, Goulis DG, Lopes P, Mishra G, Mueck A, et al. Calcium in the prevention of postmenopausal osteoporosis: EMAS clinical guide. Maturitas 2018;107:7-12. [PubMed abstract]
    Boaventura RM, Mendonca RB, Fonseca FA, Mallozi M, Souza FS, Sarni ROS. Nutritional status and food intake of children with cow's milk allergy. Allergol Immunopathol (Madr) 2019;47:544-50. [PubMed abstract]
    Bakaloudi DR, Halloran A, Rippin HL, Oikonomidou AC, Dardavesis TI, Williams J, et al. Intake and adequacy of the vegan diet. A systematic review of the evidence. Clin Nutr 2021;40:3503-21. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Small Entity Compliance Guide: Health Claims on Calcium and Osteoporosis; and Calcium, Vitamin D, and Osteoporosis. 2009.
    Yao X, Hu J, Kong X, Zhu Z. Association between Dietary calcium intake and bone mineral density in older adults. Ecol Food Nutr 2020:1-12. [PubMed abstract]
    Bristow SM, Horne AM, Gamble GD, Mihov B, Stewart A, Reid IR. Dietary calcium intake and bone loss over 6 years in osteopenic postmenopausal women. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2019;104:3576-84. [PubMed abstract]
    Crandall CJ, Aragaki AK, LeBoff MS, Li W, Wactawski-Wende J, Cauley JA, et al. Calcium plus vitamin D supplementation and height loss: findings from the Women's Health Initiative Calcium and Vitamin D clinical trial. Menopause 2016;23:1277-86. [PubMed abstract]
    Reyes-Garcia R, Mendoza N, Palacios S, Salas N, Quesada-Charneco M, Garcia-Martin A, et al. Effects of daily intake of calcium and vitamin d-enriched milk in healthy postmenopausal women: a randomized, controlled, double-blind nutritional study. J Womens Health (Larchmt) 2018;27:561-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Liu C, Kuang X, Li K, Guo X, Deng Q, Li D. Effects of combined calcium and vitamin D supplementation on osteoporosis in postmenopausal women: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Food Funct 2020;11:10817-27. [PubMed abstract]
    Silk LN, Greene DA, Baker MK. The effect of calcium or calcium and vitamin d supplementation on bone mineral density in healthy males: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab 2015;25:510-24. [PubMed abstract]
    Bailey RL, Zou P, Wallace TC, McCabe GP, Craig BA, Jun S, et al. Calcium supplement use is associated with less bone mineral density loss, but does not lessen the risk of bone fracture across the menopause transition: data from the Study of Women's Health Across the Nation. JBMR Plus 2020;4:e10246. [PubMed abstract]
    Weaver CM, Alexander DD, Boushey CJ, Dawson-Hughes B, Lappe JM, LeBoff MS, et al. Calcium plus vitamin D supplementation and risk of fractures: an updated meta-analysis from the National Osteoporosis Foundation. Osteoporos Int 2016;27:367-76. [PubMed abstract]
    Zhao JG, Zeng XT, Wang J, Liu L. Association between calcium or vitamin D supplementation and fracture incidence in community-dwelling older adults: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Jama 2017;318:2466-82. [PubMed abstract]
    Kahwati LC, Weber RP, Pan H, Gourlay M, LeBlanc E, Coker-Schwimmer M, et al. Vitamin D, calcium, or combined supplementation for the primary prevention of fractures in community-dwelling adults: evidence report and systematic review for the US Preventive Services Task Force. Jama 2018;319:1600-12. [PubMed abstract]
    U. S. Preventive Services Task Force, Grossman DC, Curry SJ, Owens DK, Barry MJ, Caughey AB, et al. Vitamin D, calcium, or combined supplementation for the primary prevention of fractures in community-dwelling adults: US Preventive Services Task Force Recommendation Statement. JAMA 2018;319:1592-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Lappe J, Watson P, Travers-Gustafson D, Recker R, Garland C, Gorham E, et al. Effect of vitamin D and calcium supplementation on cancer incidence in older women: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2017;317:1234-43. [PubMed abstract]
    Brunner RL, Wactawski-Wende J, Caan BJ, Cochrane BB, Chlebowski RT, Gass ML, et al. The effect of calcium plus vitamin D on risk for invasive cancer: results of the Women's Health Initiative (WHI) calcium plus vitamin D randomized clinical trial. Nutr Cancer 2011;63:827-41. [PubMed abstract]
    Thomson CA, Aragaki AK, Prentice RL, Stefanick ML, Manson JE, et al. Long-Term Effect of Randomization to Calcium and Vitamin D Supplementation on Health in Older Women : Postintervention Follow-up of a Randomized Clinical Trial. Ann Intern Med. 2024 Apr;177(4):428-438.  [PubMed abstract]
    Bristow SM, Bolland MJ, MacLennan GS, Avenell A, Grey A, Gamble GD, et al. Calcium supplements and cancer risk: a meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. Br J Nutr 2013;110:1384-93. [PubMed abstract]
    Lappe JM, Travers-Gustafson D, Davies KM, Recker RR, Heaney RP. Vitamin D and calcium supplementation reduces cancer risk: results of a randomized trial. Am J Clin Nutr 2007;85:1586-91. [PubMed abstract]
    Schabas R. Artifact in the control group undermines the conclusions of a vitamin D and cancer study. The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 2008;87:792-. [PubMed abstract]
    Ojha RP, Felini MJ, Fischbach LA. Vitamin D for cancer prevention: valid assertion or premature anointment? The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 2007;86:1804-5. [PubMed abstract]
    Yang B, Campbell PT, Gapstur SM, Jacobs EJ, Bostick RM, Fedirko V, et al. Calcium intake and mortality from all causes, cancer, and cardiovascular disease: the Cancer Prevention Study II Nutrition Cohort. Am J Clin Nutr 2016;103:886-94. [PubMed abstract]
    Asemi Z, Saneei P, Sabihi SS, Feizi A, Esmaillzadeh A. Total, dietary, and supplemental calcium intake and mortality from all- causes, cardiovascular disease, and cancer: A meta-analysis of observational studies. Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis 2015;25:623-34. [PubMed abstract]
    Avenell A, MacLennan GS, Jenkinson DJ, McPherson GC, McDonald AM, Pant PR, et al. Long-term follow-up for mortality and cancer in a randomized placebo- controlled trial of vitamin D(3) and/or calcium (RECORD trial). J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2012;97:614-22. [PubMed abstract]
    Tantamango-Bartley Y, Knutsen SF, Jaceldo-Siegl K, Fan J, Mashchak A, Fraser GE. Independent associations of dairy and calcium intakes with colorectal cancers in the Adventist Health Study-2 cohort. Public Health Nutr 2017;20:2577-86. [PubMed abstract]
    Keum N, Aune D, Greenwood DC, Ju W, Giovannucci EL. Calcium intake and colorectal cancer risk: dose-response meta-analysis of prospective observational studies. Int J Cancer 2014;135:1940-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Huncharek M, Muscat J, Kupelnick B. Colorectal cancer risk and dietary intake of calcium, vitamin D, and dairy products: a meta-analysis of 26,335 cases from 60 observational studies. Nutr Cancer 2009;61:47-69. [PubMed abstract]
    Heine-Broring RC, Winkels RM, Renkema JM, Kragt L, van Orten-Luiten AC, Tigchelaar EF, et al. Dietary supplement use and colorectal cancer risk: a systematic review and meta-analyses of prospective cohort studies. Int J Cancer 2015;136:2388-401. [PubMed abstract]
    Cauley JA, Chlebowski RT, Wactawski-Wende J, Robbins JA, Rodabough RJ, Chen Z, et al. Calcium plus vitamin D supplementation and health outcomes five years after active intervention ended: the Women's Health Initiative. J Womens Health (Larchmt) 2013;22:915-29. [PubMed abstract]
    Calderwood AH, Baron JA, Mott LA, Ahnen DJ, Bostick RM, Figueiredo JC, et al. No evidence for posttreatment effects of vitamin D and calcium supplementation on risk of colorectal adenomas in a randomized trial. Cancer Prev Res (Phila) 2019;12:295-304. [PubMed abstract]
    Bonovas S, Fiorino G, Lytras T, Malesci A, Danese S. Calcium supplementation for the prevention of colorectal adenomas: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. World J Gastroenterol 2016;22:4594-603. [PubMed abstract]
    Kesse E, Bertrais S, Astorg P, Jaouen A, Arnault N, Galan P, et al. Dairy products, calcium and phosphorus intake, and the risk of prostate cancer: results of the French prospective SU.VI.MAX (Supplementation en Vitamines et Mineraux Antioxydants) study. Br J Nutr 2006;95:539-45. [PubMed abstract]
    Aune D, Navarro Rosenblatt DA, Chan DS, Vieira AR, Vieira R, Greenwood DC, et al. Dairy products, calcium, and prostate cancer risk: a systematic review and meta-analysis of cohort studies. Am J Clin Nutr 2015;101:87-117. [PubMed abstract]
    Song X, Li Z, Ji X, Zhang D. Calcium intake and the risk of ovarian cancer: a meta-analysis. Nutrients 2017;9. [PubMed abstract]
    Hidayat K, Chen GC, Zhang R, Du X, Zou SY, Shi BM, et al. Calcium intake and breast cancer risk: meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies. Br J Nutr 2016;116:158-66. [PubMed abstract]
    Chlebowski RT, Johnson KC, Kooperberg C, Pettinger M, Wactawski-Wende J, Rohan T, et al. Calcium plus vitamin D supplementation and the risk of breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 2008;100:1581-91. [PubMed abstract]
    Chen Y, Strasser S, Cao Y, Wang KS, Zheng S. Calcium intake and hypertension among obese adults in United States: associations and implications explored. J Hum Hypertens 2015;29:541-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Khan B, Nowson CA, Daly RM, English DR, Hodge AM, Giles GG, et al. Higher dietary calcium intakes are associated with reduced risks of fractures, cardiovascular events, and mortality: a prospective cohort study of older men and women. J Bone Miner Res 2015;30:1758-66. [PubMed abstract]
    Anderson JJ, Kruszka B, Delaney JA, He K, Burke GL, Alonso A, et al. Calcium intake from diet and supplements and the risk of coronary artery calcification and its progression among older adults: 10-year follow-up of the Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis (MESA). J Am Heart Assoc 2016;5. [PubMed abstract]
    Chung M, Tang AM, Newberry SJ. Calcium intake and cardiovascular disease risk. Ann Intern Med 2017;166:686-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Champagne CM. Dietary interventions on blood pressure: the Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) trials. Nutr Rev 2006;64:S53-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Cormick G, Ciapponi A, Cafferata ML, Belizán JM. Calcium supplementation for prevention of primary hypertension. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2015. [PubMed abstract]
    Chen C, Ge S, Li S, Wu L, Liu T, Li C. The effects of dietary calcium supplements alone or with vitamin d on cholesterol metabolism: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. J Cardiovasc Nurs 2017;32:496-506. [PubMed abstract]
    Donneyong MM, Hornung CA, Taylor KC, Baumgartner RN, Myers JA, Eaton CB, et al. Risk of heart failure among postmenopausal women: a secondary analysis of the randomized trial of vitamin D plus calcium of the women's health initiative. Circ Heart Fail 2015;8:49-56. [PubMed abstract]
    Boursiquot BC, Larson JC, Shalash OA, Vitolins MZ, Soliman EZ, Perez MV. Vitamin D with calcium supplementation and risk of atrial fibrillation in postmenopausal women. Am Heart J 2019;209:68-78. [PubMed abstract]
    Myung S-K, Kim H-B, Lee Y-J, Choi Y-J, Oh S-W. Calcium supplements and risk of cardiovascular disease: a meta-analysis of clinical trials. Nutrients 2021;13:368. [PubMed abstract]
    Paik JM, Curhan GC, Sun Q, Rexrode KM, Manson JE, Rimm EB, et al. Calcium supplement intake and risk of cardiovascular disease in women. Osteoporos Int 2014;25:2047-56. [PubMed abstract]
    Kopecky SL, Bauer DC, Gulati M, Nieves JW, Singer AJ, Toth PP, et al. Lack of evidence linking calcium with or without vitamin D supplementation to cardiovascular disease in generally healthy adults: a clinical guideline from the National Osteoporosis Foundation and the American Society for Preventive Cardiology. Ann Intern Med 2016;165:867-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Leeman L, Dresang LT, Fontaine P. Hypertensive disorders of pregnancy. Am Fam Physician 2016;93:121-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Ananth CV, Keyes KM, Wapner RJ. Pre-eclampsia rates in the United States, 1980-2010: age-period-cohort analysis. Bmj 2013;347:f6564. [PubMed abstract]
    American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists’ Task Force on Hypertension in Pregnancy. Hypertension in pregnancy. Report of the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists’ Task Force on Hypertension in Pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 2013;122:1122-31. [PubMed abstract]
    World Health Organization. Guideline: Calcium Supplementation in Pregnant Women. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2013. [PubMed abstract]
    Hofmeyr GJ, Lawrie TA, Atallah Á, Torloni MR. Calcium supplementation during pregnancy for preventing hypertensive disorders and related problems. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2018. [PubMed abstract]
    Tang R, Tang IC, Henry A, Welsh A. Limited evidence for calcium supplementation in preeclampsia prevention: a meta-analysis and systematic review. Hypertens Pregnancy 2015;34:181-203. [PubMed abstract]
    Hofmeyr GJ, Betran AP, Singata-Madliki M, Cormick G, Munjanja SP, Fawcus S, et al. Prepregnancy and early pregnancy calcium supplementation among women at high risk of pre-eclampsia: a multicentre, double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet 2019;393:330-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Hofmeyr GJ, Manyame S, Medley N, Williams MJ. Calcium supplementation commencing before or early in pregnancy, for preventing hypertensive disorders of pregnancy. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2019. [PubMed abstract]
    World Health Organization. WHO Recommendation: Calcium Supplementation During Pregnancy for Prevention of Pre-eclampsia and Its Complications. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2018. [PubMed abstract]
    Magee LA, Pels A, Helewa M, Rey E, von Dadelszen P. Diagnosis, evaluation, and management of the hypertensive disorders of pregnancy: executive summary. J Obstet Gynaecol Can 2014;36:416-41. [PubMed abstract]
    Tranquilli AL, Dekker G, Magee L, Roberts J, Sibai BM, Steyn W, et al. The classification, diagnosis and management of the hypertensive disorders of pregnancy: A revised statement from the ISSHP. Pregnancy Hypertens 2014;4:97-104. [PubMed abstract]
    Lowe SA, Bowyer L, Lust K, McMahon LP, Morton M, North RA, et al. SOMANZ guidelines for the management of hypertensive disorders of pregnancy 2014. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 2015;55:e1-29. [PubMed abstract]
    Nappo A, Sparano S, Intemann T, Kourides YA, Lissner L, Molnar D, et al. Dietary calcium intake and adiposity in children and adolescents: Cross- sectional and longitudinal results from IDEFICS/I.Family cohort. Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis 2019;29:440-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Marabujo T, Ramos E, Lopes C. Dairy products and total calcium intake at 13 years of age and its association with obesity at 21 years of age. Eur J Clin Nutr 2018;72:541-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Shahar DR, Schwarzfuchs D, Fraser D, Vardi H, Thiery J, Fiedler GM, et al. Dairy calcium intake, serum vitamin D, and successful weight loss. Am J Clin Nutr 2010;92:1017-22. [PubMed abstract]
    Li P, Fan C, Lu Y, Qi K. Effects of calcium supplementation on body weight: a meta-analysis. Am J Clin Nutr 2016;104:1263-73. [PubMed abstract]
    Caan B, Neuhouser M, Aragaki A, Lewis CB, Jackson R, LeBoff MS, et al. Calcium plus vitamin D supplementation and the risk of postmenopausal weight gain. Archives of Internal Medicine 2007;167:893-902. [PubMed abstract]
    Booth AO, Huggins CE, Wattanapenpaiboon N, Nowson CA. Effect of increasing dietary calcium through supplements and dairy food on body weight and body composition: a meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. Br J Nutr 2015;114:1013-25. [PubMed abstract]
    Chen M, Pan A, Malik VS, Hu FB. Effects of dairy intake on body weight and fat: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Am J Clin Nutr 2012;96:735-47. [PubMed abstract]
    Moore-Schiltz L, Albert JM, Singer ME, Swain J, Nock NL. Dietary intake of calcium and magnesium and the metabolic syndrome in the National Health and Nutrition Examination (NHANES) 2001-2010 data. Br J Nutr 2015;114:924-35. [PubMed abstract]
    Han D, Fang X, Su D, Huang L, He M, Zhao D, et al. Dietary calcium intake and the risk of metabolic syndrome: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Sci Rep 2019;9:19046. [PubMed abstract]
    Asemi Z, Raygan F, Bahmani F, Rezavandi Z, Talari HR, Rafiee M, et al. The effects of vitamin D, K and calcium co-supplementation on carotid intima-media thickness and metabolic status in overweight type 2 diabetic patients with CHD. Br J Nutr 2016;116:286-93. [PubMed abstract]
    Jackson RD, LaCroix AZ, Gass M, Wallace RB, Robbins J, Lewis CE, et al. Calcium plus vitamin D supplementation and the risk of fractures. N Engl J Med 2006;354:669-83. [PubMed abstract]
    Wallace RB, Wactawski-Wende J, O'Sullivan MJ, Larson JC, Cochrane B, Gass M, et al. Urinary tract stone occurrence in the Women's Health Initiative (WHI) randomized clinical trial of calcium and vitamin D supplements. Am J Clin Nutr 2011;94:270-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Candelas G, Martinez-Lopez JA, Rosario MP, Carmona L, Loza E. Calcium supplementation and kidney stone risk in osteoporosis: a systematic literature review. Clin Exp Rheumatol 2012;30:954-61. [PubMed abstract]
    Song I, Borland J, Arya N, Wynne B, Piscitelli S. Pharmacokinetics of dolutegravir when administered with mineral supplements in healthy adult subjects. J Clin Pharmacol 2015;55:490-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Jalloh MA, Gregory PJ, Hein D, Risoldi Cochrane Z, Rodriguez A. Dietary supplement interactions with antiretrovirals: a systematic review. Int J STD AIDS 2017;28:4-15 [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Tivicay Label. 2020.
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Dovato Label. 2019.
    Morini E, Catalano A, Lasco A, Morabito N, Benvenga S. L-thyroxine malabsorption due to calcium carbonate impairs blood pressure, total cholesterolemia, and fasting glycemia. Endocrine 2019;64:284-92. [PubMed abstract]
    Singh N, Singh PN, Hershman JM. Effect of calcium carbonate on the absorption of levothyroxine. Jama 2000;283:2822-5. [PubMed abstract]
    Schneyer CR. Calcium carbonate and reduction of levothyroxine efficacy. Jama 1998;279:750. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. LEVO-T Label. 2017.
    Jones BJ, Twomey PJ. Requesting patterns for serum calcium concentration in patients on long-term lithium therapy. Int J Clin Pract 2009;63:170-2. [PubMed abstract]
    Pletz MW, Petzold P, Allen A, Burkhardt O, Lode H. Effect of calcium carbonate on bioavailability of orally administered gemifloxacin. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2003;47:2158-60. [PubMed abstract]
    Kays MB, Overholser BR, Mueller BA, Moe SM, Sowinski KM. Effects of sevelamer hydrochloride and calcium acetate on the oral bioavailability of ciprofloxacin. Am J Kidney Dis 2003;42:1253-9. [PubMed abstract]

Disclaimer

This fact sheet by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Office of Dietary Supplements (ODS) provides information that should not take the place of medical advice. We encourage you to talk to your health care providers (doctor, registered dietitian, pharmacist, etc.) about your interest in, questions about, or use of dietary supplements and what may be best for your overall health. Any mention in this publication of a specific product or service, or recommendation from an organization or professional society, does not represent an endorsement by ODS of that product, service, or expert advice.

Updated: July 11, 2025


 Carnitine: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals (original version)
Carnitine: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals
Table of Contents

    Introduction
    Recommended Intakes
    Sources of Carnitine
    Carnitine Deficiency
    Groups at Risk of Carnitine Inadequacy
    Carnitine and Health
    Health Risks from Excessive Carnitine
    Interactions with Medications
    Carnitine and Healthful Diets
    References
    Disclaimer

Introduction

Carnitine, derived from an amino acid, is the generic term for several compounds, including L-carnitine, acetyl-L-carnitine, and propionyl-L-carnitine [1]. Carnitine is naturally present in many foods—especially foods of animal origin—and is available as a dietary supplement. Carnitine is also synthesized endogenously in the liver, kidneys, and brain from the amino acids lysine and methionine [2,3]. Carnitine is a conditionally essential nutrient because the requirements for carnitine exceed an individual’s ability to synthesize this nutrient only under certain conditions (e.g., premature birth or kidney disfunction) [2].

Carnitine plays a critical role in energy production. It is an essential cofactor that helps transport long-chain fatty acids into the mitochondria so that they can be oxidized to produce energy in the form of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) [4]. Carnitine also helps transport some toxic compounds out of the mitochondria [4].

Carnitine is concentrated in tissues that oxidize fatty acids as a dietary fuel [1,5]. About 95% of total body carnitine is stored in heart and skeletal muscle. Most of the remainder is stored in the liver and kidney, and circulating plasma contains only about 0.5% of the body’s carnitine. Excess plasma carnitine is excreted in urine [6].

The body needs about 15 mg/day of carnitine from a combination of dietary sources and endogenous synthesis [7]. Foods of animal origin provide most of the carnitine in American diets. A typical omnivorous diet provides about 24 to 145 mg carnitine daily for a person weighing 165 pounds. In contrast, a vegan diet provides about 1.2 mg carnitine [1].

Endogenous carnitine synthesis does not appear to be affected by dietary carnitine intake or carnitine excretion and is sufficient to meet the carnitine needs of healthy people [1]. A person weighing 165 lb who follows a strict vegetarian diet, for example, synthesizes approximately 14.4 mg/day carnitine [1].

Carnitine status is not routinely assessed in clinical practice, but it can be determined by measuring circulating carnitine. A plasma free carnitine concentration of 20 mcmol/L or less, or a total carnitine concentration of 30 mcmol/L or less, is abnormally low [1]. The ratio of acyl-L-carnitine ester to free L-carnitine can also be used to assess carnitine status because under normal conditions most carnitine is in the free unesterified form. A ratio of 0.4 or greater in plasma or serum indicates abnormal carnitine metabolism and suggests carnitine insufficiency [1,8,9].
Recommended Intakes

Healthy children and adults do not need to consume carnitine from food or supplements because the liver and kidneys synthesize sufficient amounts to meet daily needs [10,11,12]. In 1989, the Food and Nutrition Board (FNB) of the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine concluded that carnitine is not an essential nutrient [12]. Therefore, the FNB did not establish Dietary Reference Intakes (DRIs) for carnitine [13].
Sources of Carnitine
Food

Carnitine is present in animal products, especially red meat [1]. Poultry, fish, and dairy foods also provide some carnitine, but vegetables, fruits, and grains provide negligible amounts [1,12,14].

Dietary carnitine has a bioavailability of about 63% to 75% [1]. The bioavailability of acetyl-L-carnitine has not been well studied [15].

Data on the carnitine content of specific foods are limited. The U.S. Department of Agriculture’s (USDA's) FoodData Central does not include the carnitine content of foods [16]. Table 1 lists several foods and their approximate carnitine content per serving, based on several small studies.
Table 1: Carnitine Content of Selected Foods [10] Food 	Milligrams
(mg) per
serving
Beef steak, cooked, 3 ounces 	42–122
Ground beef, cooked, 3 ounces 	65–74
Milk, whole, 1 cup 	8
Codfish, cooked, 3 ounces 	3–5
Chicken breast, cooked, 3 ounces 	2–4
Ice cream, ½ cup 	3
Cheese, cheddar, 2 ounces 	2
Whole-wheat bread, 2 slices 	0.2
Asparagus, cooked, ½ cup 	0.1
Dietary supplements

Carnitine is available in dietary supplements containing only carnitine or a combination of carnitine and other ingredients [17]. The two main forms of carnitine in dietary supplements are L-carnitine and acetyl-L-carnitine, and amounts range from about 3 mg to 5,000 mg [17].

Absorption of supplemental L-carnitine is about 14% to 18%, much less than that of dietary L-carnitine [1].
Carnitine Deficiency

Two types of carnitine deficiency states exist. Primary carnitine deficiency is a genetic disorder of the cellular carnitine transporter system that causes a shortage of carnitine within cells. Primary carnitine deficiency usually presents during infancy or early childhood. It can result in epilepsy and encephalopathy in infants; seizures, irregular heartbeat, and breathing problems in adolescents and young adults; and myopathy, rhabdomyolysis, cardiomyopathy, or sudden death in older people. Although some individuals with primary carnitine deficiency do not have symptoms, all affected people have an increased risk of heart failure, hepatic disorders, and coma [18].

Secondary carnitine deficiency results from certain disorders (such as chronic renal failure) that reduce endogenous carnitine synthesis or increase its excretion or from chronic use of pivalate-containing medications that reduce carnitine absorption or increase its excretion [10,19]. Signs and symptoms of secondary carnitine deficiency include hyperammonemic encephalopathy (malaise, seizures, and decreased consciousness caused by elevated ammonia levels), hypoglycemia, hypoketonemia (low level of ketones in the blood), dicarboxylic aciduria (increased concentrations of dicarboxylic acids in the urine), hyperuricemia (excess uric acid in the blood), muscle weakness, myoglobinuria (excess myoglobin in the urine), cardiomyopathy, and sudden death [20].

Primary and secondary carnitine deficiency can be resolved with high doses (20–200 mg/kg/day) of supplemental carnitine [5,21,22,23].
Groups at Risk of Carnitine Inadequacy

The following groups are among those most likely to have inadequate carnitine status.
Premature infants

Babies born prematurely have high growth demands but have low carnitine stores and an inadequate ability to synthesize this nutrient [24]. Premature infants may require supplemental carnitine in addition to that supplied in breast milk and fortified infant formula [1]. Many enteral and parenteral formulas for premature infants are fortified with L-carnitine to improve lipid metabolism and promote weight gain [1]. However, a Cochrane Review of six randomized clinical trials in newborns requiring parenteral nutrition (many of whom were premature) did not support the use of parenteral carnitine to improve lipid utilization or weight gain [25].
Individuals with secondary carnitine deficiency due to end-stage renal disease, hemodialysis, or both

Carnitine homeostasis in individuals with renal diseases can be impaired by reduced synthesis and increased elimination of carnitine by the kidneys. Renal diseases can also reduce carnitine intake from food because patients often have poor appetite and consume fewer animal products [20]. Many patients with end-stage renal disease, particularly those on hemodialysis, become carnitine insufficient.

Low levels of carnitine in blood and muscle stores can contribute to anemia, muscle weakness, fatigue, altered levels of blood fats, and heart disorders. Numerous studies suggest that high doses of supplemental carnitine (often injected) administered to patients on maintenance hemodialysis can correct some or all of these symptoms [26]. However, most of these studies had small numbers of participants and were not double-blind clinical trials. The authors of a meta-analysis of these studies concluded that carnitine supplements might help patients manage their anemia but not their blood-lipid profiles, and that the effects of these supplements on exercise capacity and heart disorders were inconclusive [26].
Carnitine and Health

This section focuses on seven areas of health in which the role of supplemental carnitine is being investigated: Alzheimer’s disease and dementia, cardiovascular disease (CVD) and peripheral artery disease, insulin resistance and diabetes, infertility, osteoarthritis, athletic performance enhancement, and weight loss.
Alzheimer’s disease and dementia

Alzheimer’s disease is characterized by the accumulation of plaques and the degeneration of neurons in the brain, including cholinergic neurons involved in memory functions [27]. Cholinergic neurons use the neurotransmitter acetylcholine [27], and Alzheimer’s disease is often treated by increasing acetylcholine levels or preventing its breakdown [28].

Carnitine might be conditionally essential in individuals with Alzheimer’s disease because it may support acetylcholine synthesis and help remove toxic compounds to alleviate mitochondrial dysfunction associated with extensive degeneration of brain structures [2]. Therefore, researchers have examined whether acetyl-L-carnitine supplements benefit individuals with Alzheimer’s disease or other forms of dementia, but studies have had mixed results [2,29].

In a 2003 meta-analysis of 21 clinical trials, a total of 1,204 adults with mild cognitive impairment or mild Alzheimer’s disease took supplements containing 1.5 to 3.0 g/day acetyl-L-carnitine or placebo for 3 to 12 months. Clinical and psychometric assessment scores were better, and improvements determined by clinicians were greater in supplement users than in the placebo groups [30].

In contrast, a 2003 Cochrane Review of 15 clinical trials (including 13 of those in the meta-analysis described above) had somewhat different findings [29]. The clinical trials assessed the effectiveness of 1 to 3 g/day acetyl-L-carnitine supplementation or placebo over 12 to 52 weeks in participants with mild to moderate dementia or cognitive decline. The results showed that the supplementation decreased symptom severity at 12 and 24 weeks but not at 52 weeks. Similarly, acetyl-L-carnitine supplements improved scores on the Mini Mental State Examination at 24 weeks but not at 12 or 52 weeks and had no effect on the severity of dementia, functional ability, or overall clinical global impression scores. The authors of the Cochrane Review noted that results from studies conducted more recently were less positive than those from earlier studies; they concluded that the routine clinical use of acetyl-L-carnitine supplements to treat the signs and symptoms of dementia was not justified.

The effects of acetyl-L-carnitine supplements in Alzheimer’s disease and other forms of dementia remain unclear and continue to be an area of active research [2,31,32].
Cardiovascular disease (CVD) and peripheral artery disease

Carnitine plays a role in transporting long-chain fatty acids in the myocardial mitochondria, where they are metabolized via oxidation for energy. It is also involved in moderating oxidative stress [33,34] and might decrease markers of inflammation [35]. During ischemic events, carnitine prevents fatty acid ester accumulation, which can lead to fatal ventricular arrhythmias [34]. For these reasons, researchers are examining whether carnitine affects cardiovascular health.

Clinical trials examining the effects of carnitine supplements on CVD have had mixed results. A meta-analysis of 13 clinical trials included a total of 3,629 adults with acute myocardial infarction who took either L-carnitine (from 2.7 g/day for 5 days to 6 g/day for 12 months) or placebo. The study found that L-carnitine significantly reduced rates of all-cause mortality, ventricular arrhythmias, and new-onset angina but did not affect risk of heart failure or myocardial reinfarction [34,36]. The carnitine dose and duration of the clinical trial did not appear to affect outcomes.

Another meta-analysis of 17 clinical trials that included a total of 1,625 adults with chronic heart failure found that 1 g/day to 6 g/day for 7 days to 3 years L-carnitine supplements improved left ventricular ejection fraction by 4.14%, stroke volume by 8.21 mL, and cardiac output by 0.88 L/min compared to routine/conventional treatment [37]. These benefits did not vary by supplement dose or study duration. However, L-carnitine did not affect rates of all-cause mortality or performance on a timed walking test.

Other research has raised concerns about the negative cardiovascular effects of chronic exposure to carnitine. A 2013 study that included 2,595 adults age 54–71 years undergoing elective cardiac evaluation found that L-carnitine is metabolized by intestinal microbiota to trimethylamine-N-oxide (TMAO), a proatherogenic substance that is associated with increased CVD risk [38]. Because of differences in intestinal bacteria composition, omnivorous study participants produced more TMAO than vegans or vegetarians after consumption of L-carnitine. The study also found dose-dependent associations between fasting plasma L-carnitine concentrations and risk of coronary artery disease, peripheral artery disease, and CVD, but only in participants with concurrently high TMAO levels.

A 2022 clinical trial also found potentially deleterious outcomes in 157 individuals age 58 to 75 years with metabolic syndrome who received 1 g supplemental L-carnitine or placebo twice a day for 6 months [39]. Although the results showed no differences in total plaque volume between groups, total cholesterol and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels were higher in participants taking L-carnitine. L-carnitine supplementation was also associated with 9.3% greater carotid arterial plaque stenosis in males who ate less red meat and had lower baseline stenosis and total plaque volume than other participants.

Peripheral artery disease is a vascular disorder usually caused by atherosclerosis and its resulting arterial stenosis and occlusion. It is prevalent among older adults, although it is often underdiagnosed [40,41]. Researchers have examined whether propionyl-L-carnitine, an acyl derivative of L-carnitine, mitigates the cramping leg pain of intermittent claudication, the main symptom of peripheral artery disease, but findings from studies have been mixed. A systematic review of three randomized clinical trials compared 234 participants who took 2 g/day oral propionyl-L-carnitine for 4 to 6 months with 222 patients who took placebo [42]. In one trial, participants supplemented with propionyl-L-carnitine had improved peak walking times (walking until pain could not be tolerated), self-reported improvements in walking distance and speed, and decreased pain. The other two trials showed no benefit of propionyl-L-carnitine on peak walking time compared with placebo.

More research is needed to fully understand the effects of carnitine on cardiovascular health.
Insulin resistance and diabetes

Insulin resistance plays an important role in the development of type 2 diabetes. Because insulin resistance may be associated with mitochondrial dysfunction and a defect in fatty-acid oxidation in muscle [43,44,45,46], carnitine supplementation has been studied for its possible effects on insulin resistance and diabetes.

A 2023 meta-analysis of 41 randomized clinical trials examined the effects of L-carnitine supplementation on glycemic markers in 2,900 men and women age 18 years and older [47]. Most participants had health conditions such as type 2 diabetes, obesity, polycystic ovary syndrome, or nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. L-carnitine supplements at doses of 0.25 to 4 g/day for 2 to 52 weeks reduced fasting blood glucose, insulin resistance, and glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c) but not serum insulin levels.

Other meta-analyses have had a narrower focus, examining only studies in specific populations. A 2017 meta-analysis included five randomized clinical trials (three of which were included in the 2023 meta-analysis described above) in a total of 631 adults with insulin resistance who took 2 or 3 g/day L-carnitine or placebo for 4 weeks to 12 months [48]. The L-carnitine improved measures of insulin resistance, and the benefits at 12 months exceeded those at 3 months.

A systematic review and meta-analysis of four randomized clinical trials (all of which were included in the 2023 meta-analysis described above) with a total of 284 adults with type 2 diabetes compared the metabolic effects of L-carnitine with those of placebo [44]. The results showed that 2 or 3 g/day L-carnitine for 12 to 52 weeks reduced levels of fasting plasma glucose, total cholesterol, LDL cholesterol, and apolipoproteins B100 and A1 but not triglycerides, lipoprotein (a), or HbA1c.

Additional clinical trials with larger samples are needed to determine whether L-carnitine supplements can reduce the risk of diabetes or the severity of its clinical manifestations.
Infertility

Carnitine might play a role in sperm maturation, sperm motility, and spermatogenesis [49]. It might also reduce oxidative stress, which could improve oocyte growth and maturation [50]. Therefore, researchers are examining whether supplemental carnitine improves sperm count, concentration, and motility as well as pregnancy rates.

A systematic review and meta-analysis of three randomized clinical trials examined the effects of 1 g/day to 3 g/day L-carnitine or acetyl-L-carnitine for 2 to 6 months on sperm parameters in 201 men age 20 to 40 years who had infertility [51]. Compared to placebo, supplemental carnitine improved sperm motility by 7.84% and morphology by 4.91% but did not affect sperm concentration.

A 2022 Cochrane Review assessed the effectiveness of carnitine supplementation on male subfertility (delays in conception due to low sperm concentration) [52]. The review included six randomized clinical trials in a total of 1,089 men with subfertility who took 1,000 to 3,000 mg/day carnitine for 8 weeks to 6 months. In some trials, carnitine was compared with placebo, whereas in others, it was compared with antioxidants (such as vitamin C or vitamin E) or a control group that received no treatment. Carnitine supplementation increased sperm motility and concentration at some timepoints (e.g., 3 months) but did not affect rates of live birth or pregnancy.

Researchers have also examined whether carnitine might improve ovulation and pregnancy rates in females with polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), a condition that commonly causes infertility. In one 26-month randomized controlled trial, 170 women younger than 35 years took clomiphene citrate and either 3 g/day supplemental L-carnitine or placebo from day 3 of their menstrual cycle until the day of their first positive pregnancy test result [53]. Individuals in the group taking L-carnitine had 64.4% higher ovulation rates and thicker endometrial tissue (10.1 mm vs. 6.8 mm) than those in the placebo group. In addition, more participants in the L-carnitine group became pregnant than those who took placebo, and they had fewer miscarriages.

In a 3-month randomized controlled trial, 280 women with PCOS received either 3 g L-carnitine or placebo [54,55]. Participants who took L-carnitine supplements had improved menstrual cycle regularity and higher ovulation and pregnancy rates, but miscarriage rates did not differ between the groups.

More research is needed to determine whether carnitine supplements affect male infertility or pregnancy rates in women with PCOS.
Osteoarthritis

Some research suggests that carnitine reduces levels of C-reactive protein, a biomarker of systemic inflammation, and levels of malondialdehyde, a lipid peroxidation product that induces pain and disability in patients with osteoarthritis [56]. In addition, levels of acylcarnitines (conjugated carnitine esters) are lower in people with osteoarthritis than in age- and gender-matched healthy individuals [57]. For these reasons, investigators are studying whether L-carnitine supplements can relieve osteoarthritis symptoms [56,58], but study results have been mixed.

A randomized clinical trial examined the anti-inflammatory effects of L-carnitine supplementation for osteoarthritis management in 69 women age 40 to 60 years with mild to moderate osteoarthritis in both knees [59]. The women took 250 mg L-carnitine three times a day or placebo for 8 weeks. Serum levels of several inflammation biomarkers and pain scores were lower in the carnitine group than in the placebo group: Interleukin-1-beta levels decreased 5.53%, matrix metalloproteinase-1 levels decreased 9.10%, and the visual analog scale of pain decreased 52.67%.

In another randomized clinical trial, 76 women (average age 55 years) with obesity and knee osteoarthritis took 1 g/day L-carnitine or placebo for 12 weeks [56]. In comparison with placebo, carnitine did not reduce osteoarthritis pain or stiffness or increase physical function.

Larger studies with samples that include both men and women are needed to determine whether carnitine supplementation helps manage osteoarthritis symptoms.
Athletic performance enhancement

Carnitine helps preserve muscle glycogen and promote fat oxidation. It also spares the use of amino acids as energy sources during exercise, making them potentially available for new protein synthesis [6], and decreases the accumulation of lactate [60]. However, research findings on the effectiveness of supplemental carnitine on athletic performance are mixed [6].

One study randomly assigned 14 recreational athletes age 24–28 years with an average body mass index (BMI) of 23 to consume a carbohydrate solution with or without 2.0 g of L-carnitine tartrate twice a day for 24 weeks [61]. At the end of the trial, perceived exertion on a cycle ergometer at a workload of 50% and then 80% of maximal oxygen consumption (VO2max, a measure of aerobic fitness and endurance capacity) was lower in the carnitine group (14.0, Borg scale) than in the control group (16.2).

In another study, 24 men age 18–40 years (eight omnivores and 16 vegetarians) took 1 g L-carnitine twice daily for 12 weeks [62]. Each participant performed a 60-minute cycling exercise at 75% VO2max at the beginning and end of the trial. Carnitine supplementation had no significant effect on VO2max, blood lactate concentration, skeletal muscle energy metabolism, or physical performance in either the vegetarians or the omnivores. Carnitine supplementation increased skeletal muscle carnitine stores in the vegetarians, but not the omnivores, by approximately 13%.

A 2018 comprehensive review summarized the effects of supplemental L-carnitine on exercise performance and recovery in well-trained athletes (age 16–36 years) and recreationally active adults (age 18–50 years) [63]. The review included 11 clinical trials (one of which was the trial described above) in a total of 251 well-trained athletes who took 1 to 4 grams L-carnitine or placebo a single time or once or twice daily for up to 6 months. L-carnitine supplements reduced lactate levels and heart rate; increased lipid metabolism, VO2max, oxygen consumption, and L-carnitine plasma concentrations; improved performance; and hastened recovery in some of the studies. However, the supplements did not affect performance or maximal exercise test results in other studies. In 17 studies that included recreationally active adults, a total of 237 participants took 2 g L-carnitine once or 2 to 4 g L-carnitine or placebo once or twice daily for up to 3 months. L-carnitine decreased plasma lactate concentrations, pyruvate concentrations, and muscle soreness and increased VO2max and recovery in some studies. However, in other studies, L-carnitine did not affect lactate, heart rate, VO2max, endurance, performance time, or perceived exertion during exercise.

A systematic review of 11 randomized clinical trials examined the effects of oral L-carnitine supplementation on high- and moderate-intensity exercise performance in a total of 203 physically active and untrained adults age 18 to 46 years [64]. Participants took 3 to 4 g/day L-carnitine for 1 week or 1 to 3 g/day for 4 to 24 weeks or placebo (or, in one study also described above, a carbohydrate solution). The studies had mixed results. Some studies found significant improvements in VO2max, peak power, maximum sprinting power, perceived exertion, and number of repetitions and volume lifted in a leg press in the L-carnitine group. However, other studies found no differences in VO2max, fatigue, maximum and average power, or total work on a cycle ergometer. No studies found that L-carnitine supplementation improved moderate-intensity exercise performance.

Overall, the evidence on supplemental carnitine’s effectiveness for performance enhancement is mixed, and additional investigations are needed.
Weight loss

Because carnitine transports fatty acids into the mitochondria and acts as a cofactor for fatty acid oxidation, researchers have proposed using L-carnitine supplements to promote weight loss, often in conjunction with a low-calorie diet, exercise, or prescription weight-loss drugs [65]. Weight loss has been a secondary outcome in most studies, and these studies have had equivocal results.

In a randomized clinical trial in 258 adults age 47–59 years with uncontrolled type 2 diabetes, participants who took 2 g/day L-carnitine plus the prescription medication orlistat (360 mg/day) for 1 year lost more weight (11.3 kg) than those who took orlistat alone (9.5 kg) [66]. However, in another randomized clinical trial, 2 g/day L-carnitine alone for 6 months did not affect weight loss in 94 men and women who were overweight (age 43–58 years; BMI range 24.6–29.8) and had newly diagnosed type 2 diabetes [67]. A 2016 systematic review and meta-analysis combined the results from nine randomized clinical trials in adults (including the two described above) that assessed carnitine’s effects on weight loss [65]. The trials included a total of 911 participants. In eight trials, doses ranged from 1.8 to 4 g/day L-carnitine for 30 to 360 days; in the ninth trial, the dose was 15 mg/kg/day for 182 days. Study participants who took carnitine supplements lost an average of 1.33 kg more weight than those who took a placebo, regardless of the study duration or L-carnitine dose.

Larger studies are needed to determine whether carnitine supplementation affects weight loss.
Health Risks from Excessive Carnitine

Carnitine does not have an established tolerable upper intake level. However, doses of approximately 3 g/day of carnitine supplements can cause nausea, vomiting, abdominal cramps, diarrhea, and a fishy body odor [10,11]. It can also cause muscle weakness in people with uremia and seizures in those with seizure disorders.

Some research indicates that intestinal bacteria metabolize unabsorbed carnitine to form TMAO and gamma-butyrobetaine [68], which might increase the risk of CVD [38,39,69,70,71]. This effect appears to be more pronounced in people who consume meat than in vegans or vegetarians. The implications of these findings are not well understood and require more research.
Interactions with Medications

Several types of medications have the potential to interact with carnitine supplements. A few examples are provided below. People taking these and other medications on a regular basis should discuss their carnitine intake with their healthcare providers.
Pivalate-conjugated antibiotics

Carnitine interacts with pivalate-conjugated antibiotics, such as pivampicillin, that are used to prevent urinary tract infections [72]. Chronic administration of these antibiotics can lead to carnitine depletion. However, although tissue carnitine levels in people who take these antibiotics may become low enough to limit fatty acid oxidation, no cases of illness due to carnitine deficiency in this population have been described [10,15,73].
Valproic acid and other anticonvulsants

Treatment with the anticonvulsants valproic acid, phenobarbital, phenytoin, and carbamazepine reduces blood levels of carnitine [74,75,76,77]. In addition, the use of valproic acid with or without other anticonvulsants may cause hepatotoxicity and increase plasma ammonia concentrations, leading to encephalopathy [76,78]. This toxicity may also occur after acute valproic acid overdoses. Intravenous L-carnitine administration might help treat valproic acid toxicity in children and adults, although the optimal regimen has not been identified [78,79,80].
Carnitine and Healthful Diets

The federal government’s 2020–2025 Dietary Guidelines for Americans notes that “Because foods provide an array of nutrients and other components that have benefits for health, nutritional needs should be met primarily through foods. … In some cases, fortified foods and dietary supplements are useful when it is not possible otherwise to meet needs for one or more nutrients (e.g., during specific life stages such as pregnancy).”

For more information about building a healthy dietary pattern, refer to the Dietary Guidelines for Americans and the USDA's MyPlate.
The Dietary Guidelines for Americans describes a healthy eating pattern as one that

    Includes a variety of vegetables, fruits, whole grains, fat-free or low-fat milk and milk products, and oils.
        Dairy foods, such as milk, yogurt, and cheese, naturally contain carnitine.
    Includes a variety of protein foods, including seafood, lean meats and poultry, eggs, legumes (beans and peas), nuts, seeds, and soy products.
        Red meat and other foods derived from animals, including fish, poultry, and eggs, are sources of carnitine.
    Limits saturated and trans fats, added sugars, and sodium.
    Stays within your daily calorie needs.

References

    Rebouche CJ. Carnitine. In: Ross AC, Caballero B, Cousins RJ, et al., eds. Modern Nutrition in Health and Disease. 11th ed. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2014:252-3.
    Ferreira GC, McKenna MC. L-carnitine and acetyl-L-carnitine roles and neuroprotection in developing brain. Neurochem Res 2017;42:1661-75. [PubMed abstract]
    National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine, National Institute of Mental Health, Office of Dietary Supplements, National Institutes of Health. Carnitine: The Science Behind a Conditionally Essential Nutrient. March 25-26, 2004.
    Belay B, Esteban-Cruciani N, Walsh CA, Kaskel FJ. The use of levo-carnitine in children with renal disease: a review and a call for future studies. Pediatr Nephrol 2006;21:308-17. [PubMed abstract]
    Borum PR. Carnitine. In: Marriott B, Birt DF, Stalling V, Yates A, eds. Present Knowledge in Nutrition, 11th ed. 2020:551-9.
    Gnoni A, Longo S, Gnoni GV, Giudetti AM. Carnitine in human muscle bioenergetics: Can carnitine supplementation improve physical exercise? Molecules 2020;25:182. [PubMed abstract]
    Pekala J, Patkowska-Sokoła B, Bodkowski R, Jamroz D, Nowakowski P, et al. L-carnitine--metabolic functions and meaning in humans life. Curr Drug Metab 2011;12:667-78. [PubMed abstract]
    Coulter DL. Carnitine Deficiency. In: Daroff R, Aminoff M, eds. Encyclopedia of the Neurological Sciences, 2nd ed. Elsevier, 2014:597–99.
    Ezgu F. Inborn errors of metabolism. Adv Clin Chem 2016;73:195-250. [PubMed abstract]
    Rebouche CJ. Carnitine. In: Shils ME, Olson JA, Shike M, et al., eds. Modern Nutrition in Health and Disease, 9th ed. New York, NY: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 1999:505-12.
    Alesci S, Manoli I, Costello R, Coates P, Gold PW, et al. Carnitine: lessons from one hundred years of research. Ann NY Acad Sci 2004;1033:ix-xi.
    National Research Council. Food and Nutrition Board. Recommended Dietary Allowances, 10th ed. National Academy Press, Washington, DC, 1989.
    Institute of Medicine. Food and Nutrition Board. Dietary Reference Intakes for Energy, Carbohydrate, Fiber, Fat, Fatty Acids, Cholesterol, Protein, and Amino Acids. Washington, DC; 2005.
    Durazzo A, Lucarini M, Nazhand A, Bouto SB, Silva AM, et al. The nutraceutical value of carnitine and its use in dietary supplements. Molecules 2020;25:2127. [PubMed abstract]
    Rebouche CJ. Kinetics, pharmacokinetics, and regulation of L-carnitine and acetyl-L-carnitine metabolism. Ann NY Acad Sci 2004;1033:30-41.
    U.S. Department of Agriculture. FoodData Central . 2022.
    Office of Dietary Supplements, National Institutes of Health. Dietary Supplement Label Database. 2022.
    Genetics Home Reference. Primary carnitine deficiency. MedlinePlus 2014.
    Stanley CA. Carnitine deficiency disorders in children. Ann NY Acad Sci 2004;1033:42-51. [PubMed abstract]
    Calvani M, Benatti P, Mancinelli A, D’Iddio S, Giordano V, et al. Carnitine replacement in end-stage renal disease and hemodialysis. Ann NY Acad Sci 2004;1033:52-66. [PubMed abstract]
    Ferreira CR, Van Karnebeek CD. Inborn errors of metabolism. In: de Vries LS, Glass HC, eds. Handbook of Clinical Neurology, vol. 162: Neonatal Neurology. Elsevier; 2019:449-81.
    Longo N, Frigeni M, Pasquali M. Carnitine transport and fatty acid oxidation. Biochim Biophys Acta 2016;1863:2422-35. [PubMed abstract]
    Eknoyan G, Latos DL, Lindberg J, National Kidney Foundation Carnitine Consensus Conference. Practice recommendations for the use of L-carnitine in dialysis-related carnitine disorder. Am J Kidney Dis 2003;41:868-76. [PubMed abstract]
    Almannai M, Alfadhel M, El-Hattab AW. Carnitine inborn errors of metabolism. Molecules 2019;24:3251. [PubMed abstract]
    Cairns PA, Stalker DJ. Carnitine supplementation of parenterally fed neonates. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2000:CD000950. [PubMed abstract]
    Hurot J-M, Cucherat M, Haugh M, Fouque D. Effects of L-carnitine supplementation in maintenance hemodialysis patients: a systematic review. J Am Soc Nephrol 2002;13:708-14. [PubMed abstract]
    Ferreira-Vieira TH, Guimaraes IM, Silva FR, Ribeiro FM. Alzheimer's disease: Targeting the cholinergic system. Curr Neuropharmacol 2016;14:101-15. [PubMed abstract]
    Bianchetti A, Rozzini R, Trabucchi M. Effects of acetyl-L-carnitine in Alzheimer's disease patients unresponsive to acetylcholinesterase inhibitors. Curr Med Res Opin 2003;19:350-3. [PubMed abstract]
    Hudson S, Tabet N. Acetyl-L-carnitine for dementia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2003;2003(2):CD003158. [PubMed abstract]
    Montgomery SA, Thal LJ, Amrein R. Meta-analysis of double blind randomized controlled clinical trials of acetyl-L-carnitine versus placebo in the treatment of mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer's disease. Int Clin Psychopharmacol 2003;18:61-71. [PubMed abstract]
    Pennisi M, Lanza G, Cantone M, D'Amico E, Fisicaro F, et al. Acetyl-L-carnitine in dementia and other cognitive disorders: A critical update. Nutrients 2020;12:1389. [PubMed abstract]
    Lodeiro M, Ibáñez C, Cifuentes A, Simó C, Cedazo-Mínguez A. Decreased cerebrospinal fluid levels of L-carnitine in non-apolipoprotein E4 carriers at early stages of Alzheimer's disease. J Alzheimers Dis 2014;41:223-32. [PubMed abstract]
    Oyanagi E, Yano H, Uchida M, Utsumi K, Sasaki J. Protective action of L-carnitine on mitochondrial function and structure against fatty acid stress. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2011;412:61-7. [PubMed abstract]
    DiNicolantonio JJ, Lavie CJ, Fares H, Menezes AR, O’Keefe JH. L-carnitine in the secondary prevention of cardiovascular disease: systematic review and meta-analysis. Mayo Clin Proc 2013;88:544-51. [PubMed abstract]
    Haghighatdoost F, Jabbari M, Hariri M. The effect of L-carnitine on inflammatory mediators: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 2019;75:1037-46. [PubMed abstract]
    DiNicolantonio JJ, McCarty M, OKeefe J. Association of moderately elevated trimethylamine N-oxide with cardiovascular risk: is TMAO serving as a marker for hepatic insulin resistance. Open Heart 2019;6:e000890.  [PubMed abstract]
    Song X, Qu H, Yang Z, Rong J, Cai W, et al. Efficacy and safety of l-carnitine treatment for chronic heart failure: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Biomed Res Int 2017;2017:6274854. [PubMed abstract]
    Koeth RA, Wang Z, Levison BS, Buffa JA, Org E, et al. Intestinal microbiota metabolism of L-carnitine, a nutrient in red meat, promotes atherosclerosis. Nat Med 2013;19:576-85. [PubMed abstract]
    Johri AM, Hétu M-F, Heyland DK, Herr JE, Korol J, et al. Progression of atherosclerosis with carnitine supplementation: a randomized controlled trial in the metabolic syndrome. Nutr Metab (Lond) 2022;19:26. [PubMed abstract]
    Campia U, Gerhard-Herman M, Piazza G, Goldhaber SZ. Peripheral artery disease: past, present, and future. Am J Med 2019;132:1133-41. [PubMed abstract]
    Morley RL, Sharma A, Horsch AD, Hinchliffe RJ. Peripheral artery disease. BMJ 2018;360:j5842. [PubMed abstract]
    Tama B, Fabara SP, Zarrate D, Anas Sohail A. Effectiveness of propionyl-L-carnitine supplementation on exercise performance in intermittent claudication: a systematic review. Cureus 2021;13:e17592. [PubMed abstract]
    Mingrone G. Carnitine in type 2 diabetes. Ann NY Acad Sci 2004;1033:99-107. [PubMed abstract]
    Vidal-Casariego A. Metabolic effects of L-carnitine on type 2 diabetes mellitus: systematic review and meta-analysis. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes 2013;121:5. [PubMed abstract]
    Sangwung P, Petersen KF, Shulman GI, Knowles JW. Mitochondrial dysfunction, insulin resistance, and potential genetic implications. Endocrinology 2020;161:bqaa017. [PubMed abstract]
    Yazıcı D, Sezer H. Insulin resistance, obesity and lipotoxicity. Adv Exp Med Biol 2017;960:277-304. [PubMed abstract]
    Zamani M, Pahlavani N, Nikbaf-Shandiz M, Rasaei N, Ghaffarian-Ensaf R, et al. The effects of L-carnitine supplementation on glycemic markers in adults: A systematic review and dose-response meta-analysis. Front Nutr. 2023 Jan 10;9:1082097. [PubMed abstract]
    Xu Y, Jiang W, Chen G, Zhu W, Ding W, et al. L-carnitine treatment of insulin resistance: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Adv Clin Exp Med 2017;26:333-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Skoracka K, Eder P, Łykowska-Szuber L, Dobrowolska A, Krela-Kaźmierczak I. Diet and nutritional factors in male (in)fertility-underestimated factors. J Clin Med 2020;9:1400. [PubMed abstract]
    Agarwal A, Sengupta P, Durairajanayagam D. Role of L-carnitine in female infertility. Reprod Biol Endocrinol 2018;16:5. [PubMed abstract]
    Salas-Huetos A, Rosique-Esteban N, Becerra-Tomás N, Vizmanos B, Bulló M, et al. The effect of nutrients and dietary supplements on sperm quality parameters: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials. Adv Nutr 2018;9:833-48. [PubMed abstract]
    de Ligny W, Smits RM, Mackenzie-Proctor R, Jordan V, Fleischer K, et al. Antioxidants for male subfertility. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2022;5:CD007411. [PubMed abstract]
    Ismail AM, Hamed AH, Saso S, Thabet HH. Adding L-carnitine to clomiphene resistant PCOS women improves the quality of ovulation and the pregnancy rate. A randomized clinical trial. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 2014;180:148-52. [PubMed abstract]
    El Sharkwy I, El-Din MS. L-Carnitine plus metformin in clomiphene-resistant obese PCOS women, reproductive and metabolic effects: a randomized clinical trial. Gynecol Endocrinol 2019;35:701-5. [PubMed abstract]
    Showell MG, Mackenzie-Proctor R, Jordan V, Hart RJ. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2020 Aug 27;8(8):CD007807. [PubMed abstract]
    Baghban F, Hosseinzadeh M, Mozaffari-Khosravi H, Dehghan A, Fallahzadeh H. The effect of L-carnitine supplementation on clinical symptoms, C-reactive protein and malondialdehyde in obese women with knee osteoarthritis: a double blind randomized controlled trial. BMC Musculoskelet Disord 2021;22:195. [PubMed abstract]
    Tootsi K, Kals J, Zilmer M, Paapstel K, Ottas A, et al. Medium- and long-chain acylcarnitines are associated with osteoarthritis severity and arterial stiffness in end-stage osteoarthritis patients: a case-control study. Int J Rheum Dis 2018;21:1211-18. [PubMed abstract]
    Liu X, Machado GC, Eyles JP, Ravi V, Hunter DJ. Dietary supplements for treating osteoarthritis: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Br J Sports Med 2018;52:167-75. [PubMed abstract]
    Mahdavi AM, Mahdavi R, Kolahi S. Effects of L-carnitine supplementation on serum inflammatory factors and matrix metalloproteinase enzymes in females with knee osteoarthritis: A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled pilot study. J Am Coll Nutr 2016;35:597-603. [PubMed abstract]
    Peeling P, Binnie MJ, Goods PSR, Sim M, Burke LM. Evidence-based supplements for the enhancement of athletic performance. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab 2018;28:178-87. [PubMed abstract]
    Wall BT, Stephens FB, Constantin-Teodosiu D, Marimuthu K, Macdonald IA, Greenhaff PL. Chronic oral ingestion of L-carnitine and carbohydrate increases muscle carnitine content and alters muscle fuel metabolism during exercise in humans. J Physiol 2011;589:963-73. [PubMed abstract]
    Novakova K, Kummer O, Bouitbir J, Stoffel SD, Hoerler-Koerner U, Bodmer M, Roberts P, Urwyler A, Ehrsam R, Krähenbühl S. Effect of L-carnitine supplementation on the body carnitine pool, skeletal muscle energy metabolism and physical performance in male vegetarians. Eur J Nutr 2016;55:207-17. [PubMed abstract]
    Fielding R, Riede L, Lugo JP, Bellamine A. L-carnitine supplementation in recovery after exercise. Nutrients 2018;10:349. [PubMed abstract]
    Mielgo-Ayuso J, Pietrantonio L, Viribay A, Calleja-González J, González-Bernal J, et al. Effect of acute and chronic oral l-carnitine supplementation on exercise performance based on the exercise intensity: A systematic review. Nutrients 2021;13:4359. [PubMed abstract]
    Pooyandjoo M, Nouhi M, Shab-Bidar S, Djafarian K, Olyaeemanesh A. The effect of L-carnitine on weight loss in adults: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Obes Rev 2016;17:970-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Derosa G, Maffioli P, Ferrari I, D’Angelo A, Fogari E, Palumbo I, et al. Orlistat and L-carnitine compared to orlistat alone on insulin resistance in obese diabetic patients. Endocr J 2010;57:777-86. [PubMed abstract]
    Derosa G, Cicero AF, Gaddi A, Mugellini A, Ciccarelli L, Fogari R. The effect of L-carnitine on plasma lipoprotein(a) levels in hypercholesterolemic patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Clin Ther 2003;25:1429-39. [PubMed abstract]
    Koeth RA, Levison BS, Culley MK, Buffa JA, Wang Z, et al. γ-Butyrobetaine is a proatherogenic intermediate in gut microbial metabolism of L-carnitine to TMAO. Cell Metab 2014;20:799-812. [PubMed abstract]
    Buffa JA, Romano KA, Copeland MF, Cody DB, Zhu W, et al. The microbial gbu gene cluster links cardiovascular disease risk associated with red meat consumption to microbiota L-carnitine catabolism. XNat Microbiol 2022;7:73-86. [PubMed abstract]
    Skagen K, Trøseid M, Ueland T, Holm S, Abbas A, et al. The carnitine-butyrobetaine-trimethylamine-N-oxide pathway and its association with cardiovascular mortality in patients with carotid atherosclerosis. Atherosclerosis 2016;247:64-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Yang S, Li X, Yang F, Zhao R, Pan X, et al. Gut microbiota-dependent marker TMAO in promoting cardiovascular disease: Inflammation mechanism, clinical prognostic, and potential as a therapeutic target. Front Pharmacol 2019;10:1360. [PubMed abstract]
    Brass EP. Pivalate-generating prodrugs and carnitine homeostasis in man. Pharmacol Rev 2002;54:589-98. [PubMed abstract]
    Okumura A, Numoto S, Iwayama H, Azuma Y, Kurahashi H. Carnitine supplementation prevents carnitine deficiency caused by pivalate-conjugated antibiotics in patients with epilepsy prescribed valproate. Epilepsy Behav 2021;117:107883. [PubMed abstract]
    Hug G, McGraw CA, Bates SR, Landrigan EA. Reduction of serum carnitine concentrations during anticonvulsant therapy with phenobarbital, valproic acid, phenytoin, and carbamazepine in children. J Pediatr 1991;119:799-802. [PubMed abstract]
    Castro-Gago M, Eiris-Punal J, Novo-Rodriguez MI, Couceiro J, Camina F, et al. Serum carnitine levels in epileptic children before and during treatment with valproic acid, carbamazepine, and phenobarbital. J Child Neurol 1998;13:546-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Verrotti A, Greco R, Morgese G, Chiarelli F. Carnitine deficiency and hyperammonemia in children receiving valproic acid with and without other anticonvulsant drugs. Int J Clin Lab Res 1999;29:36-40. [PubMed abstract]
    Kobayashi H, Fukuda S, Yamada K, Hasegawa Y, Takahashi T, et al. J Clinical features of carnitine deficiency secondary to pivalate-conjugated antibiotic therapy. Pediatr 2016;173:183-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Lheureux PE, Hantson P. Carnitine in the treatment of valproic acid-induced toxicity. Clin Toxicol (Phila) 2009;47:101-11. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Search Orphan Drug Designations and Approvals. November 1989.
    Perrott J, Murphy NG, Zed PJ. L-carnitine for acute valproic acid overdose: a systematic review of published cases. Ann Pharmacother 2010;44:1287-93. [PubMed abstract]

Disclaimer

This fact sheet by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Office of Dietary Supplements (ODS) provides information that should not take the place of medical advice. We encourage you to talk to your healthcare providers (doctor, registered dietitian, pharmacist, etc.) about your interest in, questions about, or use of dietary supplements and what may be best for your overall health. Any mention in this publication of a specific product or service, or recommendation from an organization or professional society, does not represent an endorsement by ODS of that product, service, or expert advice.

Updated: April 17, 2023


 Choline: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals (original version)
Choline: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals
Table of Contents

    Introduction
    Recommended Intakes
    Sources of Choline
    Choline Intakes and Status
    Choline Deficiency
    Groups at Risk of Choline Inadequacy
    Choline and Health
    Health Risks from Excessive Choline
    Interactions with Medications
    Choline and Healthful Diets
    References
    Disclaimer

Introduction

Choline is an essential nutrient that is naturally present in some foods and available as a dietary supplement. Choline is a source of methyl groups needed for many steps in metabolism. The body needs choline to synthesize phosphatidylcholine and sphingomyelin, two major phospholipids vital for cell membranes. Therefore, all plant and animal cells need choline to preserve their structural integrity [1,2]. In addition, choline is needed to produce acetylcholine, an important neurotransmitter for memory, mood, muscle control, and other brain and nervous system functions [1-3]. Choline also plays important roles in modulating gene expression, cell membrane signaling, lipid transport and metabolism, and early brain development [1,2].

Humans can produce choline endogenously in the liver, mostly as phosphatidylcholine, but the amount that the body naturally synthesizes is not sufficient to meet human needs [4]. As a result, humans must obtain some choline from the diet. Premenopausal women might need less choline from the diet than children or other adults because estrogen induces the gene that catalyzes the biosynthesis of choline [4]. When a diet is deficient in folate, a B-vitamin that is also a methyl donor, the need for dietary choline rises because choline becomes the primary methyl donor [1].

The most common sources of choline in foods are the fat-soluble phospholipids phosphatidylcholine and sphingomyelin as well as the water-soluble compounds phosphocholine, glycerolphosphocholine, and free choline [1]. When these choline-containing compounds are ingested, pancreatic and mucosal enzymes liberate free choline from about half of the fat-soluble forms and some water-soluble forms [5]. Free choline, phosphocholine, and glycerophosphocholine are absorbed in the small intestine, enter the portal circulation, and are stored in the liver, where they are subsequently phosphorylated and distributed throughout the body to make cell membranes [1-3]. The remaining fat-soluble phospholipids (phosphatidylcholine and sphingomyelin) are absorbed intact, incorporated into chylomicrons, and secreted into the lymphatic circulation, where they are distributed to tissues and other organs, including the brain and placenta [1,6].

Choline status is not routinely measured in healthy people. In healthy adults, the concentration of choline in plasma ranges from 7 to 20 mcmol/L [2]. According to one study, the range is 7–9.3 mcmol/L in fasting adults [7]. Plasma choline levels do not decline below 50% of normal, even in individuals who have not eaten for more than a week [3]. This may be due to the hydrolysis of membrane phospholipids, a source of choline, to maintain plasma choline concentrations above this minimal level, or to endogenous synthesis [2].
Recommended Intakes

Intake recommendations for choline and other nutrients are provided in the Dietary Reference Intakes (DRIs) developed by the Food and Nutrition Board (FNB) of the Institute of Medicine [2]. DRI is the general term for a set of reference values used for planning and assessing nutrient intakes of healthy people. These values, which vary by age and sex, include the following:

    Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA): Average daily level of intake sufficient to meet the nutrient requirements of nearly all (97%–98%) healthy individuals; often used to plan nutritionally adequate diets for individuals
    Adequate Intake (AI): Intake at this level is assumed to ensure nutritional adequacy; established when evidence is insufficient to develop an RDA
    Estimated Average Requirement (EAR): Average daily level of intake estimated to meet the requirements of 50% of healthy individuals; usually used to assess the nutrient intakes of groups of people and to plan nutritionally adequate diets for them; can also be used to assess the nutrient intakes of individuals
    Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL): Maximum daily intake unlikely to cause adverse health effects

Insufficient data were available to establish an EAR for choline, so the FNB established AIs for all ages that are based on the prevention of liver damage as measured by serum alanine aminostransferase levels [2]. The amount of choline that individuals need is influenced by the amount of methionine, betaine, and folate in the diet; gender; pregnancy; lactation; stage of development; ability to produce choline endogenously; and genetic mutations that affect choline needs [1,2,4,5]. Table 1 lists the current AIs for choline [2].
Table 1: Adequate Intakes (AIs) for Choline [2] Age 	Male 	Female 	Pregnancy 	Lactation
Birth to 6 months 	125 mg/day 	125 mg/day 		
7–12 months 	150 mg/day 	150 mg/day 		
1–3 years 	200 mg/day 	200 mg/day 		
4–8 years 	250 mg/day 	250 mg/day 		
9–13 years 	375 mg/day 	375 mg/day 		
14–18 years 	550 mg/day 	400 mg/day 	450 mg/day 	550 mg/day
19+ years 	550 mg/day 	425 mg/day 	450 mg/day 	550 mg/day
 
Sources of Choline
Food

Many foods contain choline [4]. The main dietary sources of choline in the United States consist primarily of animal-based products that are particularly rich in choline—meat, poultry, fish, dairy products, and eggs [4,5,8-10]. Cruciferous vegetables and certain beans are also rich in choline, and other dietary sources of choline include nuts, seeds, and whole grains.

About half the dietary choline consumed in the United States is in the form of phosphatidylcholine [8,9]. Many foods also contain lecithin, a substance rich in phosphatidylcholine that is prepared during commercial purification of phospholipids; lecithin is a common food additive used as an emulsifying agent in processed foods, such as gravies, salad dressings, and margarine [1,3]. Choline is also present in breast milk and is added to most commercial infant formulas [3,4]. Precise estimates of the percentage absorption of the different forms of dietary choline in humans are not available [2,3].

Several food sources of choline are listed in Table 2.
Table 2: Choline Content of Selected Foods [11] Food 	Milligrams
(mg) per
serving 	Percent
DV*
Beef liver, pan fried, 3 ounces 	356 	65
Egg, hard boiled, 1 large 	147 	27
Beef top round, separable lean only, braised, 3 ounces 	117 	21
Soybeans, roasted, ½ cup 	107 	19
Chicken breast, roasted, 3 ounces 	72 	13
Beef, ground, 93% lean meat, broiled, 3 ounces 	72 	13
Fish, cod, Atlantic, cooked, dry heat, 3 ounces 	71 	13
Potatoes, red, baked, flesh and skin, 1 large potato 	57 	10
Wheat germ, toasted, 1 ounce 	51 	9
Beans, kidney, canned, ½ cup 	45 	8
Quinoa, cooked, 1 cup 	43 	8
Milk, 1% fat, 1 cup 	43 	8
Yogurt, vanilla, nonfat, 1 cup 	38 	7
Brussels sprouts, boiled, ½ cup 	32 	6
Broccoli, chopped, boiled, drained, ½ cup 	31 	6
Mushrooms, shiitake, cooked, ½ cup pieces 	27 	5
Cottage cheese, nonfat, 1 cup 	26 	5
Fish, tuna, white, canned in water, drained, 3 ounces 	25 	5
Peanuts, dry roasted, ¼ cup 	24 	4
Cauliflower, 1" pieces, boiled, drained, ½ cup 	24 	4
Peas, green, boiled, ½ cup 	24 	4
Sunflower seeds, oil roasted, ¼ cup 	19 	3
Rice, brown, long grain, cooked, 1 cup 	19 	3
Bread, pita, whole wheat, 1 large (6½ inch diameter) 	17 	3
Cabbage, boiled, ½ cup 	15 	3
Tangerine (mandarin orange), sections, ½ cup 	10 	2
Beans, snap, raw, ½ cup 	8 	1
Kiwi fruit, raw, ½ cup sliced 	7 	1
Carrots, raw, chopped, ½ cup 	6 	1
Apples, raw, with skin, quartered or chopped, ½ cup 	2 	0

*DV = Daily Value. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) developed DVs to help consumers compare the nutrient contents of foods and dietary supplements within the context of a total diet. The DV for choline is 550 mg for adults and children age 4 years and older [12]. FDA does not require food labels to list choline content unless choline has been added to the food. Foods providing 20% or more of the DV are considered to be high sources of a nutrient, but foods providing lower percentages of the DV also contribute to a healthful diet.

The U.S. Department of Agriculture’s (USDA’s) FoodData Central [11] lists the nutrient content of many foods and provides a comprehensive list of foods containing choline arranged by nutrient content.
Dietary supplements

Choline is available in dietary supplements containing choline only, in combination with B-complex vitamins, and in some multivitamin/mineral products [13]. Typical amounts of choline in dietary supplements range from 10 mg to 250 mg. The forms of choline in dietary supplements include choline bitartrate, phosphatidylcholine, and lecithin. No studies have compared the relative bioavailability of choline from these different forms.
Choline Intakes and Status

Most people in the United States consume less than the AI for choline. An analysis of data from the 2013–2014 National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) found that the average daily choline intake from foods and beverages among children and teens is 256 mg for ages 2–19 [14]. In adults, the average daily choline intake from foods and beverages is 402 mg in men and 278 mg in women. Intakes from supplements contribute a very small amount to total choline intakes.

According to an analysis of 2007–2008 NHANES data, black males of all ages had lower mean choline intakes than their white and Hispanic counterparts, but choline intakes did not differ substantially among females of different races/ethnicities [10].
Choline Deficiency

Choline deficiency can cause muscle damage, liver damage, and nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD or hepatosteatosis) [1,2,4,15]. Although most people in the United States consume less than the AI of choline, frank choline deficiency in healthy men and nonpregnant women is very rare, possibly because of the contribution of choline that the body synthesizes endogenously [1,5].
Groups at Risk of Choline Inadequacy

The following groups are among those most likely to have inadequate choline status.
Pregnant women

Approximately 90%–95% of pregnant women consume less choline than the AI [16]. Prenatal dietary supplements typically contain little if any choline [17]. The risk of inadequate choline status might be greater in pregnant and lactating women who do not take folic acid supplements, those with low vitamin B12 status, and those with a common variant in methylenetetrahydrofolate dehydrogenase (an enzyme that can affect folate status), all of which reduce the body’s pool of methyl groups needed for metabolism [17-20].

Some evidence indicates that lower plasma or serum choline levels (e.g., serum concentration of 2.77 mmol/L in midpregnancy) are associated with an increased risk of neural tube defects [21,22]. However, other research found no relationship between plasma choline concentrations during pregnancy and neural tube defects in offspring [23].
People with certain genetic alterations

Genes involved in the metabolism of choline, folate, and methionine play a role in the pathways for choline production and use [24,25]. Humans have variations in the DNA sequences for these genes (single nucleotide polymorphisms [SNPs]), and these SNPs can have a strong influence on demands for dietary choline. For example, one common SNP in the PEMT gene reduces endogenous synthesis of choline in women induced by estrogen [26]. The prevalence of SNPs that alter requirements for dietary choline vary by race. In a study of 100 African, Asian, Caucasian, and Mexican Americans, individuals of European ancestry had a higher prevalence of four SNPs that increased the risk of organ dysfunction when these individuals consumed a low-choline diet [27].
Patients requiring total parenteral nutrition

At present, choline is not routinely added to commercial parenteral solutions for infants and adults [28,29]. As a result, adults and infants receiving total parenteral nutrition (TPN) over the long term have low plasma choline concentrations (approximately 5 nmol/ml in adults and 5.7 nmol/ml in infants), which can result in hepatic abnormalities, including NAFLD [30-32]. The American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition recommends the routine addition of choline to adult and pediatric parenteral nutrition formulations and calls for the development of a commercially available parenteral product that contains choline [28].
Choline and Health

This section focuses on three conditions in which choline might play a role: cardiovascular and peripheral artery disease, neurological disorders, and NAFLD. Choline is involved in functions that overlap with those of folate and other B vitamins. Many studies do not assess the status of all B vitamins, which can confound results and obscure the true relationship between choline and the observed outcome.
Cardiovascular and peripheral artery disease

Some researchers have suggested that choline might protect cardiovascular health by reducing blood pressure, altering lipid profiles, and reducing levels of plasma homocysteine [3]. Other research suggests that higher dietary choline might increase cardiovascular disease risk because some choline and other dietary ingredients, such as carnitine, are converted to trimethylamine (TMA) by intestinal bacteria. The TMA is then absorbed and converted by the liver into trimethylamine-N-oxide (TMAO), a substance that has been linked to a higher risk of cardiovascular disease [33,34].

Despite the hypothesis that choline might affect heart health, several large observational studies have found no significant associations between choline intakes and cardiovascular or peripheral artery disease risk. An analysis of 72,348 women in the Nurses’ Health Study and 44,504 men in the Health Professionals Follow-Up Study showed no association between choline intake and risk of peripheral artery disease in men or women [35]. Similarly, a prospective study in 14,430 middle-age adults in the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities Study found that over 14 years, risk of coronary heart disease was not significantly different in the highest choline intake quartile compared to the lowest quartile [36]. Choline intakes also had no association with cardiovascular disease risk in a study of 16,165 women participating in the European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition [37].

However, a more recent analysis of data on 80,978 women from the Nurses’ Health Study and 39,434 men from the Health Professionals Follow-Up Study found an increased risk of mortality in those consuming higher levels of choline [33]. The authors suggest that the higher risk might be due to increased production of TMAO, although they did not directly measure TMAO.

Additional research is needed to determine the relationship between choline intakes and cardiovascular and peripheral artery disease as well as the potential risks and benefits of choline supplementation to reduce the risk of these diseases.
Neurological disorders

People with Alzheimer’s disease have lower levels of the enzyme that converts choline into acetylcholine in the brain [38]. In addition, because phosphatidylcholine can serve as a phospholipid precursor, it might help support the structural integrity of neurons and thus might promote cognitive function in elderly adults [8]. Some experts have therefore theorized that consuming higher levels of phosphatidylcholine could reduce the progression of dementia in people with Alzheimer’s disease [38]. However, little research conducted to date supports this hypothesis, as described below.

A few observational studies have shown a link between cognitive performance in adults and both higher choline intakes and plasma concentrations. In one observational study in 2,195 adults age 70–74 years in Norway, participants with plasma free choline concentrations lower than 8.4 mcmol/L (20th percentile of concentrations in the study population) had poorer sensorimotor speed, perceptual speed, executive function, and global cognition than those with choline concentrations higher than 8.4 mcmol/L [39]. A second study in 1,391 adults age 36–83 years from the Framingham Offspring study who completed food frequency questionnaires from 1991 to 1995 and again from 1998 to 2001 found that those with higher choline intakes had better verbal memory and visual memory [40]. Furthermore, higher choline intakes during the earlier period were associated with smaller white matter hyperintensity volume (a high volume is a sign of small-vessel disease in the brain).

Some small randomized intervention trials have shown that choline supplements improve cognitive performance in adults [30,41]. However, a 2015 systematic review of 13 studies on the relationship between choline levels and neurological outcomes in adults found that choline supplements did not result in clear improvements in cognition in healthy adults [8]. Similarly, a 2003 Cochrane Review of 12 randomized trials in 265 patients with Alzheimer’s disease, 21 with Parkinsonian dementia, and 90 with self-identified memory problems found no clear clinical benefits of lecithin supplementation for treating Alzheimer’s disease or Parkinsonian dementia [38].

Future studies are needed to clarify the relationship between choline intakes and cognitive function and determine whether choline supplements might benefit patients with Alzheimer’s disease or other forms of dementia.
Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease

NAFLD involves the accumulation of lipids in the livers of people who consume less than 20 g/day ethanol and who have no other known causes of steatosis [42,43]. (A single drink [e.g., 12 oz beer, 5 oz wine, or 1.5 oz hard liquor] contains about 12–14 g alcohol.) It is the most common chronic liver disorder, present in up to 65% of individuals who are overweight and 90% of those with obesity [1]. Although it is often benign, NAFLD can lead to steatohepatitis, fibrosis, cirrhosis, liver failure, and liver cancer [15]. Choline, especially phosphatidylcholine, is essential for transporting lipids from the liver [1]. Therefore, in choline deficiency, fat accumulates in the liver, which can result in NAFLD [44,45]. Although most women of childbearing age are resistant to NAFLD because of their high estrogen levels, at least 40% have a polymorphism that makes them insensitive to activation of the gene by estrogen; adequate consumption of dietary choline is particularly important for this population [46].

Data from a single large observational study support a link between choline deficiency and risk of NAFLD. Specifically, a cross-sectional study of 56,195 Chinese adults age 40–75 years found an inverse relationship between dietary choline intakes and risk of NAFLD based on 24-hour dietary recall [47]. The risk of NAFLD was 32% lower in women in the highest quintile of choline intake (412 mg/day) compared to the lowest (179 mg/day) and 25% lower in men in the highest (452 mg/day) quintile compared to those in the lowest (199 mg/day). However, choline intake was associated with NAFLD in normal-weight women only and not in those with overweight or obesity. This difference by weight status was not observed in men.

In a cross-sectional study of 664 adults and children from the Nonalcoholic Steatohepatitis Clinical Research Network, postmenopausal women who had nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (an extreme form of NAFLD involving liver inflammation and fibrosis) and a choline intake less than 50% of the AI had more severe fibrosis, but the results showed no relationship between choline intake and degree of liver steatosis [48].

Only limited data are available on the use of choline to treat NAFLD. For example, in a study of 57 adults who consumed a diet that included less than 50 mg choline per 70 kg body weight per day (<10% of the AI) for up to 42 days, 37 of the participants developed liver dysfunction [45]. Liver function returned to normal in 29 participants in this study after they were fed a diet containing 25%–75% of the choline AI and in eight who consumed an ad libitum diet. A pilot study in 15 adults on TPN found that NAFLD resolved completely in all patients who received their usual TPN regimen with an additional 2 g choline and in none of the patients who received their usual TPN regimen only [49].

Adequate choline intake is needed for proper liver function and to prevent NAFLD, but more research is needed to further clarify the role of choline in preventing or treating NAFLD [50].
Health Risks from Excessive Choline

High intakes of choline are associated with a fishy body odor, vomiting, excessive sweating and salivation, hypotension, and liver toxicity [1,2]. Choline consumption has been shown to increase production of TMAO, a substance that has been linked to a higher risk of cardiovascular disease, in a dose-dependent manner in adults.

The FNB has established ULs for choline from food and supplements based on the amounts of choline that are associated with hypotension and fishy body odor (see Table 3) [2]. The ULs apply to healthy children and adults but not to those taking high doses of choline under medical supervision. The FNB was unable to establish ULs for infants due to the lack of data on adverse effects in this age group.
Table 3: Tolerable Upper Intake Levels (ULs) for Choline [2] Age 	Male 	Female 	Pregnancy 	Lactation
Birth to 6 months* 				
7–12 months* 				
1–3 years 	1,000 mg 	1,000 mg 		
4–8 years 	1,000 mg 	1,000 mg 		
9–13 years 	2,000 mg 	2,000 mg 		
14–18 years 	3,000 mg 	3,000 mg 	3,000 mg 	3,000 mg
19+ years 	3,500 mg 	3,500 mg 	3,500 mg 	3,500 mg

*Not possible to establish; breast milk, formula, and food should be the only sources of choline for infants.
Interactions with Medications

Choline is not known to have any clinically relevant interactions with medications.
Choline and Healthful Diets

The federal government's 2020–2025 Dietary Guidelines for Americans notes that "Because foods provide an array of nutrients and other components that have benefits for health, nutritional needs should be met primarily through foods. ... In some cases, fortified foods and dietary supplements are useful when it is not possible otherwise to meet needs for one or more nutrients (e.g., during specific life stages such as pregnancy)."

For more information about building a healthy dietary pattern, refer to the Dietary Guidelines for Americans and the USDA's MyPlate.

The Dietary Guidelines for Americans describes a healthy dietary pattern as one that

    Includes a variety of vegetables; fruits; grains (at least half whole grains); fat-free and low-fat milk, yogurt, and cheese; and oils.
        Many vegetables, fruits, whole grains, and dairy products contain choline.
    Includes a variety of protein foods such as lean meats; poultry; eggs; seafood; beans, peas, and lentils; nuts and seeds; and soy products.
        Fish, beef, poultry, eggs, and some beans and nuts are rich sources of choline.
    Limits foods and beverages higher in added sugars, saturated fat, and sodium.
    Limits alcoholic beverages.
    Stays within your daily calorie needs.

References

    Zeisel SH, Corbin KD. Choline. In: Erdman JW, Macdonald IA, Zeisel SH, eds. Present Knowledge in Nutrition. 10th ed. Washington, DC: Wiley-Blackwell; 2012:405-18.
    Institute of Medicine. Food and Nutrition Board. Dietary Reference Intakes: Thiamin, Riboflavin, Niacin, Vitamin B6, Folate, Vitamin B12, Pantothenic Acid, Biotin, and Choline. Washington, DC: National Academy Press; 1998.
    Zeisel SH. Choline. In: Coates PM, Betz JM, Blackman MR, et al., eds. Encyclopedia of Dietary Supplements. 2nd ed. London and New York: Informa Healthcare; 2010:136-43.
    Zeisel SH. Choline. In: Ross AC, Caballero B, Cousins RJ, Tucker KL, Ziegler TR, eds. Modern Nutrition in Health and Disease. 11th ed. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2014:416-26.
    Hollenbeck CB. An introduction to the nutrition and metabolism of choline. Cent Nerv Syst Agents Med Chem 2012;12:100-13. [PubMed abstract]
    Caudill MA, Miller JW, Gregory JF, 3rd, Shane B. Folate, choline, vitamin B12, and vitamin B6. In: H. SM, Caudill MA, eds. Biochemical, Physiological, and Molecular Aspects of Human Nutrition. 3rd ed; 2012:565-608.
    Holm PI, Ueland PM, Kvalheim G, Lien EA. Determination of choline, betaine, and dimethylglycine in plasma by a high-throughput method based on normal-phase chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. Clin Chem 2003;49:286-94. [PubMed abstract]
    Leermakers ET, Moreira EM, Kiefte-de Jong JC, Darweesh SK, Visser T, Voortman T, et al. Effects of choline on health across the life course: a systematic review. Nutr Rev 2015;73:500-22. [PubMed abstract]
    Sanders LM, Zeisel SH. Choline: Dietary Requirements and Role in Brain Development. Nutr Today 2007;42:181-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Chester DN, Goldman JD, Ahuja JK, Moshfegh AJ. Dietary Intakes of Choline: What We Eat in America, NHANES 2007-2008. Dietary Data Brief 2011;9:1-4.
    U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service. FoodData Central, 2019.
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Food Labeling: Revision of the Nutrition and Supplement Facts Labels. 2016.
    National Institutes of Health. Dietary Supplement Label Database. 2015.
    U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service. Nutrient Intakes from Food and Beverages: Mean Amounts Consumed per Individual, by Gender and Age, What We Eat in America, NHANES 2013-2014. 2016.
    Corbin KD, Zeisel SH. Choline metabolism provides novel insights into nonalcoholic fatty liver disease and its progression. Curr Opin Gastroenterol 2012;28:159-65. [PubMed abstract]
    Brunst KJ, Wright RO, DiGioia K, Enlow MB, Fernandez H, Wright RJ, et al. Racial/ethnic and sociodemographic factors associated with micronutrient intakes and inadequacies among pregnant women in an urban US population. Public Health Nutr 2014;17:1960-70. [PubMed abstract]
    Caudill MA. Pre- and postnatal health: evidence of increased choline needs. J Am Diet Assoc 2010;110:1198-206. [PubMed abstract]
    Wu BT, Innis SM, Mulder KA, Dyer RA, King DJ. Low plasma vitamin B-12 is associated with a lower pregnancy-associated rise in plasma free choline in Canadian pregnant women and lower postnatal growth rates in their male infants. Am J Clin Nutr 2013;98:1209-17. [PubMed abstract]
    Abratte CM, Wang W, Li R, Moriarty DJ, Caudill MA. Folate intake and the MTHFR C677T genotype influence choline status in young Mexican American women. J Nutr Biochem 2008;19:158-65. [PubMed abstract]
    Brody LC, Conley M, Cox C, Kirke PN, McKeever MP, Mills JL, et al. A polymorphism, R653Q, in the trifunctional enzyme methylenetetrahydrofolate dehydrogenase/methenyltetrahydrofolate cyclohydrolase/formyltetrahydrofolate synthetase is a maternal genetic risk factor for neural tube defects: report of the Birth Defects Research Group. Am J Hum Genet 2002;71:1207-15. [PubMed abstract]
    Wu BT, Dyer RA, King DJ, Richardson KJ, Innis SM. Early second trimester maternal plasma choline and betaine are related to measures of early cognitive development in term infants. PLoS One 2012;7:e43448. [PubMed abstract]
    Shaw GM, Finnell RH, Blom HJ, Carmichael SL, Vollset SE, Yang W, et al. Choline and risk of neural tube defects in a folate-fortified population. Epidemiology 2009;20:714-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Mills JL, Fan R, Brody LC, Liu A, Ueland PM, Wang Y, et al. Maternal choline concentrations during pregnancy and choline-related genetic variants as risk factors for neural tube defects. Am J Clin Nutr 2014;100:1069-74. [PubMed abstract]

    Corbin KD, Zeisel SH. The nutrigenetics and nutrigenomics of the dietary requirement for choline. Prog Mol Biol Transl Sci 2012;108:159-77.
    [PubMed abstract]

    da Costa KA, Kozyreva OG, Song J, Galanko JA, Fischer LM, Zeisel SH. Common genetic polymorphisms affect the human requirement for the nutrient choline. Faseb j 2006;20:1336-44.
    [PubMed abstract]
    Biswas S, Giri S. Importance of choline as essential nutrient and its role in prevention of various toxicities. Prague Med Rep 2015;116:5-15. [PubMed abstract]

    da Costa KA, Corbin KD, Niculescu MD, Galanko JA, Zeisel SH. Identification of new genetic polymorphisms that alter the dietary requirement for choline and vary in their distribution across ethnic and racial groups. Faseb j 2014;28:2970-8.
    [PubMed abstract]

    Vanek VW, Borum P, Buchman A, Fessler TA, Howard L, Jeejeebhoy K, et al. A.S.P.E.N. position paper: recommendations for changes in commercially available parenteral multivitamin and multi-trace element products. Nutr Clin Pract 2012;27:440-91.
    [PubMed abstract]
    Buchman AL. The addition of choline to parenteral nutrition. Gastroenterology 2009;137:S119-28. [PubMed abstract]
    Buchman AL, Sohel M, Brown M, Jenden DJ, Ahn C, Roch M, et al. Verbal and visual memory improve after choline supplementation in long-term total parenteral nutrition: a pilot study. JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr 2001;25:30-5. [PubMed abstract]
    Buchman AL, Moukarzel A, Jenden DJ, Roch M, Rice K, Ament ME. Low plasma free choline is prevalent in patients receiving long term parenteral nutrition and is associated with hepatic aminotransferase abnormalities. Clin Nutr 1993;12:33-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Sentongo TA, Kumar P, Karza K, Keys L, Iyer K, Buchman AL. Whole-blood-free choline and choline metabolites in infants who require chronic parenteral nutrition therapy. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr 2010;50:194-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Zheng Y, Li Y, Rimm EB, Hu FB, Albert CM, Rexrode KM, et al. Dietary phosphatidylcholine and risk of all-cause and cardiovascular-specific mortality among US women and men. Am J Clin Nutr 2016;104:173-80. [PubMed abstract]
    Tang WH, Wang Z, Levison BS, Koeth RA, Britt EB, Fu X, et al. Intestinal microbial metabolism of phosphatidylcholine and cardiovascular risk. N Engl J Med 2013;368:1575-84. [PubMed abstract]
    Bertoia ML, Pai JK, Cooke JP, Joosten MM, Mittleman MA, Rimm EB, et al. Plasma homocysteine, dietary B vitamins, betaine, and choline and risk of peripheral artery disease. Atherosclerosis 2014;235:94-101. [PubMed abstract]
    Bidulescu A, Chambless LE, Siega-Riz AM, Zeisel SH, Heiss G. Usual choline and betaine dietary intake and incident coronary heart disease: the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) study. BMC Cardiovasc Disord 2007;7:20. [PubMed abstract]
    Dalmeijer GW, Olthof MR, Verhoef P, Bots ML, van der Schouw YT. Prospective study on dietary intakes of folate, betaine, and choline and cardiovascular disease risk in women. Eur J Clin Nutr 2008;62:386-94. [PubMed abstract]
    Higgins JP, Flicker L. Lecithin for dementia and cognitive impairment. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2003:CD001015. [PubMed abstract]
    Nurk E, Refsum H, Bjelland I, Drevon CA, Tell GS, Ueland PM, et al. Plasma free choline, betaine and cognitive performance: the Hordaland Health Study. Br J Nutr 2013;109:511-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Poly C, Massaro JM, Seshadri S, Wolf PA, Cho E, Krall E, et al. The relation of dietary choline to cognitive performance and white-matter hyperintensity in the Framingham Offspring Cohort. Am J Clin Nutr 2011;94:1584-91. [PubMed abstract]
    Naber M, Hommel B, Colzato LS. Improved human visuomotor performance and pupil constriction after choline supplementation in a placebo-controlled double-blind study. Sci Rep 2015;5:13188. [PubMed abstract]
    Finelli C, Tarantino G. Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, diet and gut microbiota. Excli j 2014;13:461-90. [PubMed abstract]
    Veena J, Muragundla A, Sidgiddi S, Subramaniam S. Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease: need for a balanced nutritional source. Br J Nutr 2014;112:1858-72. [PubMed abstract]
    Buchman AL, Dubin MD, Moukarzel AA, Jenden DJ, Roch M, Rice KM, et al. Choline deficiency: a cause of hepatic steatosis during parenteral nutrition that can be reversed with intravenous choline supplementation. Hepatology 1995;22:1399-403. [PubMed abstract]
    Fischer LM, daCosta KA, Kwock L, Stewart PW, Lu TS, Stabler SP, et al. Sex and menopausal status influence human dietary requirements for the nutrient choline. Am J Clin Nutr 2007;85:1275-85. [PubMed abstract]
    Resseguie ME, da Costa KA, Galanko JA, Patel M, Davis IJ, Zeisel SH. Aberrant estrogen regulation of PEMT results in choline deficiency-associated liver dysfunction. J Biol Chem 2011;286:1649-58. [PubMed abstract]
    Yu D, Shu XO, Xiang YB, Li H, Yang G, Gao YT, et al. Higher dietary choline intake is associated with lower risk of nonalcoholic fatty liver in normal-weight Chinese women. J Nutr 2014;144:2034-40. [PubMed abstract]
    Guerrerio AL, Colvin RM, Schwartz AK, Molleston JP, Murray KF, Diehl A, et al. Choline intake in a large cohort of patients with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Am J Clin Nutr 2012;95:892-900. [PubMed abstract]
    Buchman AL, Ament ME, Sohel M, Dubin M, Jenden DJ, Roch M, et al. Choline deficiency causes reversible hepatic abnormalities in patients receiving parenteral nutrition: proof of a human choline requirement: a placebo-controlled trial. JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr 2001;25:260-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Sherriff JL, O’Sullivan TA, Properzi C, Oddo J-L, Adams LA. Choline, Its Potential Role in Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver Disease, and the Case for Human and Bacterial Genes. Advances in Nutrition: An International Review Journal 2016;7:5-13. [PubMed abstract]

Disclaimer

This fact sheet by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Office of Dietary Supplements (ODS) provides information that should not take the place of medical advice. We encourage you to talk to your health care providers (doctor, registered dietitian, pharmacist, etc.) about your interest in, questions about, or use of dietary supplements and what may be best for your overall health. Any mention in this publication of a specific product or service, or recommendation from an organization or professional society, does not represent an endorsement by ODS of that product, service, or expert advice.

Updated: June 2, 2022


 Chromium: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals (original version)
Chromium: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals
Table of Contents

    Introduction
    Recommended Intakes
    Sources of Chromium
    Chromium Intakes and Status
    Chromium Deficiency
    Chromium and Health
    Health Risks from Excessive Chromium
    Interactions with Medications
    Chromium and Healthful Diets
    References
    Disclaimer

Introduction

Chromium, as trivalent (+3) chromium, is a trace element that is naturally present in many foods and available as a dietary supplement. Chromium also exists as hexavalent (+6) chromium, a toxic by-product of stainless steel and other manufacturing processes [1,2]. This fact sheet focuses entirely on trivalent chromium.

Chromium might play a role in carbohydrate, lipid, and protein metabolism by potentiating insulin action [1-5]. Although the precise mechanism for this activity has not been identified, scientists have proposed that chromium binds to an oligopeptide to form chromodulin, a low-molecular-weight, chromium-binding substance that binds to and activates the insulin receptor to promote insulin action [4,6-8]. Chromium might also have antioxidant effects [1].

In 2001, the Food and Nutrition Board (FNB) of the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine considered chromium to be an essential nutrient based on its effects on insulin action [2]. However, recent research has suggested that although chromium might have benefits at pharmacologic amounts (e.g., in the hundreds of mcg), it is not an essential mineral because an absence or deficiency of chromium does not produce abnormalities that can be reversed with the addition of chromium (see the Chromium Deficiency section below) [5,9-13]. The FNB has not evaluated chromium since 2001. However, in 2014, the European Food Safety Authority Panel on Dietetic Products, Nutrition and Allergies concluded that no convincing evidence shows that chromium is an essential nutrient and, therefore, setting chromium intake recommendations would be inappropriate [5].

In the blood, most chromium is bound to plasma proteins, particularly transferrin, and only about 5% is unbound [5,12]. Chromium accumulates mainly in the liver, spleen, soft tissue, and bone [2,5,12].

Chromium is excreted mainly in the urine [1,12,13]. Urinary chromium levels are therefore a good indicator of chromium absorption. However, because these levels are closely related to recent chromium intakes, they are not good indicators of chromium body stores [4,14]. Hair levels might reflect past chromium intakes [5], and some studies have measured chromium levels in hair, sweat, serum, and toenails [15,16]. However, no validated methods for determining chromium status and no clinically defined chromium deficiency state exist [6,8].
Recommended Intakes

Intake recommendations for chromium and other nutrients are provided in the Dietary Reference Intakes (DRIs) developed by an expert committee of the FNB at the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine [2]. DRI is the general term for a set of reference values used for planning and assessing nutrient intakes of healthy people. These values, which vary by age and sex, include the following:

    Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA): Average daily level of intake sufficient to meet the nutrient requirements of nearly all (97%–98%) healthy individuals; often used to plan nutritionally adequate diets for individuals
    Adequate Intake (AI): Intake at this level is assumed to ensure nutritional adequacy; established when evidence is insufficient to develop an RDA
    Estimated Average Requirement (EAR): Average daily level of intake estimated to meet the requirements of 50% of healthy individuals; usually used to assess the nutrient intakes of groups of people and to plan nutritionally adequate diets for them; can also be used to assess the nutrient intakes of individuals
    Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL): Maximum daily intake unlikely to cause adverse health effects

In its 2001 evaluation, the FNB found the existing data insufficient to derive an EAR for chromium. The FNB therefore established AIs for all ages based on usual chromium intakes in healthy populations [2]. Table 1 lists the current AIs for chromium.
Table 1: Adequate Intakes (AIs) for Chromium [2] Age 	Male 	Female 	Pregnancy 	Lactation
Birth to 6 months* 	0.2 mcg 	0.2 mcg 		
7–12 months* 	5.5 mcg 	5.5 mcg 		
1–3 years 	11 mcg 	11 mcg 		
4–8 years 	15 mcg 	15 mcg 		
9–13 years 	25 mcg 	21 mcg 		
14–18 years 	35 mcg 	24 mcg 	29 mcg 	44 mcg
19–50 years 	35 mcg 	25 mcg 	30 mcg 	45 mcg
51+ years 	30 mcg 	20 mcg 		
*For infants from birth to age 12 months, the AIs are based on the mean chromium intakes of infants fed primarily human milk and, for older infants, complementary foods.
Sources of Chromium
Food

Chromium is present in many foods, including meats, grain products, fruits, vegetables, nuts, spices, brewer’s yeast, beer, and wine. However, chromium amounts in these foods vary widely depending on local soil and water conditions as well as agricultural and manufacturing processes used to produce them [4,7,12,17-20]. For example, the amount of chromium can vary 50-fold in samples of oatmeal because of growing and processing differences [21]. Some chromium can also be transferred to foods from stainless steel equipment during food processing and from pots and pans during cooking [3,4,10,17,20,22,23].

Most dairy products and foods high in sugar (e.g., sucrose and fructose) are low in chromium [2,17,24].

Human milk contains about 0.25 mcg/L chromium [2], but reported values vary widely. Small studies in Europe found chromium concentrations ranging from 0.14 to 10.8 mcg/L [5].

Dietary chromium absorption is low, ranging from about 0.4% to 2.5% [5,6]. Ascorbic acid and prostaglandin inhibitors, such as aspirin, increase chromium absorption, whereas oxalate and antacids inhibit it [1,22,25].

A variety of types of foods and their chromium levels per serving are listed in Table 2. Determining the chromium content of food is challenging because samples are easily contaminated by standard tools used for measurement and analysis [2]. Therefore, the values in Table 2 should only serve as a guide.
Table 2: Chromium Content of Selected Foods [17,19] Food 	Micrograms
(mcg) per
serving 	Percent DV*
Grape juice, 1 cup 	7.5 	21
Ham, 3 ounces 	3.6 	10
English muffin, whole wheat, 1 	3.6 	10
Brewer’s yeast, 1 tablespoon 	3.3 	9
Orange juice, 1 cup 	2.2 	6
Beef, 3 ounces 	2.0 	6
Lettuce, 1 wedge, about 5 ounces 	1.8 	5
Turkey breast, 3 ounces 	1.7 	5
Barbecue sauce, 1 tablespoon 	1.7 	5
Tomato juice, 1 cup 	1.5 	4
Apple, with peel, 1 medium 	1.4 	4
Green beans, ½ cup 	1.1 	3
Banana, 1 medium 	1.0 	3
Whole wheat bread, 1 slice 	1.0 	3
Ketchup, 1 tablespoon 	1.0 	3
Tomato, 1 medium 	0.9 	3
American cheese, 1½ ounces 	0.8 	2
Peanut butter, 1 tablespoon 	0.6 	2
Rice, white, ½ cup 	0.6 	2
Haddock, 3 ounces 	0.6 	2
Chicken breast, 3 ounces 	0.5 	1
Peas, ½ cup 	0.4 	1
Orange, 1 medium 	0.4 	1
Spaghetti, 1 cup 	0.3 	1
Carrots, raw, 1 medium 	0.3 	1
Egg, 1 medium 	0.2 	1
Celery, 1 stalk 	0.1 	0
Fat free milk, 1 cup 	<0.1 	0

*DV = Daily Value. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) developed DVs to help consumers compare the nutrient contents of foods and dietary supplements within the context of a total diet. The DV for chromium is 35 mcg for adults and children age 4 and older [26]. FDA does not require food labels to list chromium content unless chromium has been added to the food. Foods providing 20% or more of the DV are considered to be high sources of a nutrient, but foods providing lower percentages of the DV also contribute to a healthful diet.
Dietary supplements

Most multivitamin/mineral supplements contain chromium, typically 35–120 mcg. Supplements containing only chromium are also available, and they commonly provide 200 mcg to 500 mcg chromium, although some contain up to 1,000 mcg [16,27].

Dietary supplements contain many forms of chromium, including chromium picolinate, chromium nicotinate, chromium polynicotinate, chromium chloride, and chromium histidinate [18,27]. The absorption of various forms of chromium is similar [6,9]. For example, research suggests that the proportion of chromium absorbed from chromium picolinate is about 1.2%, whereas that from chromium chloride is about 0.4% [1]. These values are similar to the proportion of chromium absorbed from food [5].

Chromium compounds contain various percentages of elemental chromium. For example, elemental chromium accounts for 12.4% of the weight of chromium picolinate [18,28]. The Supplement Facts label on a dietary supplement product declares the amount of elemental chromium, not the weight of the entire chromium compound, in the product.
Chromium Intakes and Status

The National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) provides dietary intake data for many nutrients, but not chromium [29]. Therefore, data on chromium intakes in the United States are limited.

A small study in eight men and 11 women in the United States found mean chromium intakes of about 29 mcg/day for women and 54 mcg/day for men [30]. In another study, the mean chromium content per 2,000 kcal of 22 well-balanced diets designed by nutritionists was about 27 mcg and ranged from about 17 to 47 mcg [17]. These findings suggest that most people in the United States have chromium intakes similar to the AIs. A 2018 dietary intake assessment in Northern Italy found that the median chromium intake was about 57 mcg/day from a typical Italian diet [31].

Data on chromium intakes from dietary supplements are also very limited. According to an analysis of NHANES III (1988–1994) data, the median supplemental intake of chromium was about 23 mcg/day among those taking supplements containing chromium [2].
Chromium Deficiency

Chromium deficiency has not been reported in healthy populations, and no definitive deficiency symptoms have been established [3,4].

In three case studies published in the 1970s and 1980s, patients on long-term total parenteral nutrition (TPN) experienced adverse metabolic and neurological effects, including hyperglycemia, glycosuria, unexplained weight loss, peripheral neuropathy, glucose intolerance, and/or confusion [32-34]. These effects were alleviated with pharmacologic amounts of chromium. Although these adverse effects were presumed to be caused by chromium deficiency, the studies did not adequately evaluate the chromium concentrations in the TPN solutions [5]. Scientists have concluded, based on recent evaluations, that these studies do not provide evidence that the patients had chromium deficiency and thus do not demonstrate that heathy people can develop chromium deficiency [3,5,6,10,13].

Currently, chromium is routinely added to TPN solutions to provide 10–15 mcg chromium per day, a much higher daily amount than the approximately 0.15 mcg/day that healthy individuals absorb from a balanced diet [9]. Thus, the American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition and other experts recommend research on parenteral chromium requirements to determine whether chromium levels in TPN solutions should be lowered [9,13,35,36].
Chromium and Health

This section focuses on five conditions in which chromium might have beneficial effects: impaired glucose tolerance and diabetes, metabolic syndrome, polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), dyslipidemia, and weight and lean body mass.
Impaired glucose tolerance and diabetes

Because chromium might potentiate the action of insulin, studies have examined whether increasing chromium intakes might reduce the risk of impaired glucose tolerance.

Numerous randomized controlled trials have assessed the effects of chromium supplements–often at pharmacological doses (e.g., in the hundreds of mcg)–in people without diabetes or with glucose intolerance or diabetes [16]. One of the most commonly cited intervention studies of the effects of chromium supplementation for type 2 diabetes was a 1997 randomized controlled trial [37]. The trial assigned 180 adults age 35–65 years with type 2 diabetes to receive 100 mcg chromium (as chromium picolinate), 500 mcg chromium, or placebo twice daily for 4 months. At both 2 and 4 months, participants receiving 1,000 mcg/day chromium had significantly lower fasting serum glucose concentrations than those receiving placebo or 200 mcg/day chromium. At 4 months, for example, mean fasting serum glucose levels were 7.1 mmol/L (128 mg/dL) in the group receiving 1,000 mcg/day chromium and 8.8 mmol/L (159 mg/dL) in those receiving placebo. Mean serum glucose concentrations after a 75 g glucose challenge were also significantly lower at both 2 and 4 months in those receiving 1,000 mcg/day chromium (10.5 mmol/L [189 mg/dL] at 4 months vs. 12.3 mmol/L [222 mg/dL] for placebo). In comparison with placebo, both 200 mcg and 1,000 mcg/day chromium also significantly reduced fasting insulin concentrations at both 2 and 4 months, as well as insulin concentrations after a glucose challenge. Finally, hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) levels were significantly lower after 4 months in participants receiving 200 mcg/day chromium (mean 7.5%) or 1,000 mcg/day chromium (mean 6.6%) than in those receiving placebo (mean 8.5%). HbA1c is a robust measure of blood glucose control because it reflects long-term changes in blood glucose levels [38].

Several subsequent studies that used various doses of chromium had inconsistent findings. A 2019 review of chromium and glycemic control included eight meta-analyses and systematic reviews of a total of 58 clinical trials [16]. The trials lasted from 3 weeks to 6 months and administered 1.28 to 1,000 mcg chromium daily. The most frequently used form was chromium picolinate, followed by yeasts containing chromium and chromium chloride. Overall, when used as an adjuvant treatment, chromium lowered fasting plasma glucose and HbA1c levels slightly in people with diabetes. However, the clinical significance of these findings is unclear. The authors of a 2016 review of chromium supplementation in people with type 2 diabetes drew similar conclusions, noting the insufficient rationale to recommend chromium supplements for people with type 2 diabetes and that chromium supplements do not help moderate glucose levels in healthy individuals [39].

Some research suggests that responses to chromium supplementation may vary, and supplements might be more likely to benefit people with more severe insulin resistance and poorer glycemic control [18,40]. In a randomized trial in 137 participants age 30–70 years with type 2 diabetes, daily supplementation with 1,000 mcg chromium (as chromium picolinate) for 24 weeks did not significantly affect insulin sensitivity, fasting glucose levels, or HbA1c values in comparison with placebo [40]. However, some participants did respond to chromium supplementation, and these people had significantly lower insulin sensitivity (3.98 vs. 5.91 mg/kg fat-free mass/min) and higher fasting glucose (8.5 vs. 6.7 mmol/L [153 vs. 121 mg/dL]) and HbA1c levels (7.57 vs. 6.29%) than those who did not respond.

Manufacturers market chromium supplements widely in the United States for people with type 2 diabetes, and many adults use them in the hope that the supplements will reduce their risk of diabetes or improve their glycemic control [6,8,18,39]. However, FDA allows only the following qualified health claim for chromium picolinate dietary supplements:

    "One small study suggests that chromium picolinate may reduce the risk of insulin resistance, and therefore possibly may reduce the risk of type 2 diabetes. FDA concludes, however, that the existence of such a relationship between chromium picolinate and either insulin resistance or type 2 diabetes is highly uncertain" [41,42].

In its 2010 diabetes guidelines, the American Diabetes Association concluded that because studies have not definitively shown that chromium supplementation benefits people with diabetes or obesity, the association cannot recommend such supplementation [43]. This determination was based on conflicting evidence from poorly controlled or uncontrolled studies. Similarly, the association concluded in its 2015 position statement that evidence is insufficient to support the routine use of supplements containing chromium and other micronutrients for glycemic control in people with diabetes [44]. Additional research is needed to determine whether specific populations (e.g., ethnic background, obesity status, baseline insulin sensitivity, and medication use) might be more likely than others to benefit from chromium supplementation [18].
Metabolic syndrome

Metabolic syndrome is a group of risk factors—abdominal obesity, high triglyceride level, low high-density lipoprotein (HDL; good) cholesterol level, hypertension, and high fasting blood glucose level—that raise the risk of heart disease, diabetes, and stroke [45]. Insulin resistance is an integral component of this condition and is a potential therapeutic target for dietary interventions for metabolic syndrome [46]. A prospective study of 3,648 adults age 20–32 years found that baseline toenail chromium concentrations were inversely associated with the incidence of metabolic syndrome over 23 years of follow-up [47]. For these reasons, some scientists have hypothesized that chromium supplements might benefit people with metabolic syndrome.

Only a few clinical trials of chromium supplementation for metabolic syndrome have been conducted [46,48-50]. One of these trials included 63 adults age 18 to 75 years with metabolic syndrome who received either 500 mcg chromium picolinate or placebo twice daily for 16 weeks [46]. In comparison with placebo, chromium supplementation significantly increased acute insulin response to glucose but did not affect HbA1c levels, insulin sensitivity, or other measures of glucose metabolism. Chromium supplementation also had no effect on body weight or serum lipids.

Similarly, in a 2018 clinical trial of 70 adults (mean age 58 years) with metabolic syndrome and impaired glucose tolerance, daily supplementation with 300 mcg chromium (200 mcg with breakfast and 100 mcg with dinner, as chromium yeast) for 24 weeks did not affect fasting glucose levels, HbA1c, waist circumference, blood pressure, or lipid levels [49].

Overall, limited research suggests that chromium supplements do not significantly benefit people with metabolic syndrome.
Polycystic ovary syndrome

PCOS is a common endocrine disorder affecting women of reproductive age. It is characterized by infertility, obesity, dyslipidemia, hyperandrogenism, and elevated risks of type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease [51,52]. Because insulin resistance is often a central component of PCOS, studies have investigated the use of chromium supplements in people with PCOS to help maintain glycemic control and reduce lipid levels [16,53].

Four recent systematic reviews and meta-analyses of randomized clinical trials have examined the effects of chromium supplements on signs and symptoms of PCOS [52,54-56]. One analysis included seven trials with a total of 351 participants that administered chromium (as chromium picolinate) at 200 mcg to 1,000 mcg daily for 8 to 24 weeks [52]. Chromium supplementation had no effect on fasting blood glucose, total testosterone, dehydroepiandrosterone, follicle-stimulating hormone, or luteinizing hormone levels. However, chromium did significantly reduce body mass index (BMI) by 2.37 kg/m2 and free testosterone levels by 0.52 pg/mL in comparison with placebo; it also significantly reduced fasting insulin levels by 0.33 milli-IU/mL.

Another systematic review and meta-analysis of five randomized trials lasting 8 weeks to 6 months that included a total of 268 women with PCOS compared supplemental chromium (200−1,000 mcg/d, mostly as chromium picolinate) with placebo or metformin [55]. Chromium supplementation had no significant effect on fasting insulin levels or insulin sensitivity, but data from two trials showed that it did significantly lower a measure of insulin resistance. In addition, one trial included in the review found that chromium supplementation significantly improved a measure of beta-cell function. The authors concluded that the magnitude of chromium’s effect was small and of uncertain clinical relevance. Similarly, another meta-analysis and a systematic review had mixed findings [54,56].

Overall, the evidence on whether chromium supplementation reduces the risk of PCOS or is beneficial for women with this condition is mixed, making it difficult to draw firm conclusions [16]. Additional studies with sufficient samples sizes and duration in well-defined populations are needed [53].
Dyslipidemia

Numerous studies show associations between poor chromium status and elevated blood cholesterol levels [7]. Therefore, scientists hypothesize that chromium supplementation might improve blood lipid levels. Studies have examined this possibility in various populations, including people with impaired glucose tolerance, diabetes, or PCOS.

In a randomized clinical trial in 71 participants (mean age 54.1 years) with poorly controlled type 2 diabetes (HbA1c of at least 7%), supplementation with 600 mcg/day chromium picolinate for 4 months had no effect on total cholesterol, HDL, low-density lipoprotein (LDL; bad) cholesterol, or triglyceride levels in comparison with placebo [57]. However, an 8-week trial in 40 women with PCOS age 18–40 years found that 200 mcg/day chromium as chromium picolinate significantly decreased serum triglycerides in comparison with placebo (–19.2 vs. +8.3 mg/dL) and total cholesterol levels (–15.3 vs. –0.6 mg/dL) [58]. Results of studies with higher doses of supplemental chromium have also been mixed [37,59].

Overall, meta-analyses examining the effects of chromium supplementation in people with diabetes [60-64] and PCOS [54] have shown no significant changes in total cholesterol and LDL cholesterol levels [16]. However, some have shown that chromium supplementation increases HDL cholesterol levels by 1.73–4.64 mg/dL and decreases triglyceride levels by 11.71–26.57 mg/dL [63,64].

Additional research is needed to determine whether chromium supplementation has any clinically significant effects on dyslipidemia.
Weight and lean body mass

Because chromium might amplify insulin action, some scientists have proposed that chromium supplementation could reduce the amount of glucose converted to fat and increase protein synthesis and, hence, muscle mass [12]. Some preliminary research also indicates that chromium supplements might reduce food intakes, hunger levels, and fat cravings [65]. Therefore, chromium supplementation has been proposed to both enhance weight loss and improve body composition by decreasing body fat and increasing lean body mass; its effects on these outcomes have been evaluated in several clinical trials [12,66-69].

A 2019 meta-analysis included 21 trials that measured the impact of chromium supplementation on anthropometric indexes in a total of 1,316 participants age 18 or older with overweight or obesity [70]. Trial durations ranged from 9 to 24 weeks, and chromium doses were 200 to 1,000 mcg per day. Most trials used chromium picolinate, and others used chromium-enriched yeast or chromium nicotinate. Participants taking chromium supplements lost significantly more weight, 0.75 kg, than those taking placebo and had a significant 0.40 kg/m2 reduction in BMI and body fat percentage, 0.68%, in comparison with placebo. The chromium supplements had no significant effect on waist circumference or waist-to-hip ratio.

Two other systematic reviews and meta-analyses had similar findings [71,72], as did a 2013 Cochrane Review [67]. The Cochrane Review’s authors noted that the effect of chromium supplementation on body weight is of “debatable clinical relevance” and the overall quality of the evidence is low.

Overall, research suggests that supplementation with chromium, mainly in the form chromium picolinate, reduces body weight and body fat percentage to a very small, but statistically significant, extent. However, these effects have little clinical significance.
Health Risks from Excessive Chromium

The FNB concluded that no adverse effects have been linked to high intakes of chromium from food or supplements, so it did not establish a UL for chromium [2]. However, the FNB noted that caution may be warranted because the data are limited and that high intakes of chromium could have adverse effects [2,3,6]. The FNB also pointed out that people with renal and liver disease might be susceptible to adverse effects from high chromium intakes [2].

According to isolated case reports, chromium supplements might cause weight loss, anemia, thrombocytopenia, liver dysfunction, renal failure, rhabdomyolysis, dermatitis, and hypoglycemia [73,74].
Interactions with Medications

Several types of medications have the potential to interact with chromium supplements. A few examples are provided below. People taking these and other medications on a regular basis should discuss their chromium intakes with their health care providers.
Insulin

Chromium might increase insulin sensitivity [58,75,76]. Taking chromium concomitantly with insulin could increase the risk of hypoglycemia [77].
Metformin and other antidiabetes medications

The results from some studies indicate that chromium supplementation might lower blood glucose levels [16,37,57,58,60]. Therefore, chromium supplements might have an additive effect with metformin or other antidiabetes medications and thus might increase the risk of hypoglycemia.
Levothyroxine

A small study found that taking chromium picolinate supplements at the same time as levothyroxine (used to treat hypothyroidism) decreases levothyroxine absorption over 6 hours [78].
Chromium and Healthful Diets

The federal government's 2020–2025 Dietary Guidelines for Americans notes that "Because foods provide an array of nutrients and other components that have benefits for health, nutritional needs should be met primarily through foods. ... In some cases, fortified foods and dietary supplements are useful when it is not possible otherwise to meet needs for one or more nutrients (e.g., during specific life stages such as pregnancy)."

For more information about building a healthy dietary pattern, refer to the Dietary Guidelines for Americans and the U.S. Department of Agriculture's MyPlate.

The Dietary Guidelines for Americans describes a healthy dietary pattern as one that

    Includes a variety of vegetables; fruits; grains (at least half whole grains); fat-free and low-fat milk, yogurt, and cheese; and oils.
        Many whole grains, fruits, and vegetables are good sources of chromium.
    Includes a variety of protein foods such as lean meats; poultry; eggs; seafood; beans, peas, and lentils; nuts and seeds; and soy products.
        Lean meats, nuts, poultry, and eggs contain chromium.
    Limits foods and beverages higher in added sugars, saturated fat, and sodium.
    Limits alcoholic beverages.
    Stays within your daily calorie needs.

References

    Anderson RA, Cefalu WT. Chromium. In: Coates PM, Betz JM, Blackman MR, et al., eds. Encyclopedia of Dietary Supplements 2nd ed. New York, NY Informa Healthcare; 2010.
    Institute of Medicine. Food and Nutrition Board. Dietary Reference Intakes for Vitamin A, Vitamin K, Arsenic, Boron, Chromium, Copper, Iodine, Iron, Manganese, Molybdenum, Nickel, Silicon, Vanadium, and Zinc Washington, DC: National Academy Press; 2001.
    Vincent JB, Lukaski HC. Chromium. Adv Nutr 2018;9:505-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Eckhert CD. Trace Elements. In: A. Catharine Ross BC, Robert J. Cousins, Katherine L. Tucker, Thomas R. Ziegler, ed. Modern Nutrition in Health and Disease. 11th ed. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2014:248-51.
    European Food Safety Authority NDA Panel. Scientific Opinion on Dietary Reference Values for chromium. EFSA Journal 2014;12(10):3845.
    Vincent JB. Chromium In: Marriott BP, Birt DF, Stallings VA, Yates AY, eds. Present Knowledge in Nutritoin 11th ed. Cambridge, MA: Elsevier; 2020:457-65.
    Swaroop A, Bagchi M, Preuss HG, Zafra-Stone S, Ahmad T, Bagchi D. Benefits of chromium (III) complexes in animal and human health. In: Vincent JB, ed. The Nutritional Biochemistry of Chromium (III). Cambridge, MA: Elsevier; 2019:251-78.
    Landman GW, Bilo HJ, Houweling ST, Kleefstra N. Chromium does not belong in the diabetes treatment arsenal: Current evidence and future perspectives. World J Diabetes 2014;5:160-4. [PubMed abstract]
    Vincent JB, Brown S. Introduction: A history of chromium studies (1955-2007). In: Vincent JB, ed. The Nutritional Biochemistry of Chromium (III). Cambridge, MA Elsevier; 2019:1-58.
    Vincent JB. New evidence against chromium as an essential trace element. J Nutr 2017;147:2212-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Vincent JB. Is the pharmacological mode of action of chromium(III) as a second messenger? Biol Trace Elem Res 2015;166:7-12. [PubMed abstract]
    Nielsen FH. Manganese, Molybdenum, Boron, Chromium, and Other Trace Elements. In: John W. Erdman Jr. IAM, Steven H. Zeisel, ed. Present Knowledge in Nutrition. 10th ed: Wiley-Blackwell; 2012:586-607.
    Nielsen FH. Summary: The metabolism, nutritional essentiality, and clinical importance of chromium -Clarity emerging after 60 years of research. In: Vincent JB, ed. The Nutritional Biochemistry of Chromium (III). Cambridge, MA Elsevier; 2019:361-70.
    Anderson RA, Polansky MM, Bryden NA. Stability and absorption of chromium and absorption of chromium histidinate complexes by humans. Bio Trace Elem Res 2004;101:211-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Davies S, McLaren Howard J, Hunnisett A, Howard M. Age-related decreases in chromium levels in 51,665 hair, sweat, and serum samples from 40,872 patients--implications for the prevention of cardiovascular disease and type II diabetes mellitus. Metabolism 1997;46:469-73. [PubMed abstract]
    Costello RB, Dwyer JT, Merkel JM. Chromium supplements in health and disease. In: Vincent JB, ed. The Nutritional Biochemistry of Chromium (III). Cambridge, MA: Elsevier; 2019:219-59.
    Anderson RA, Bryden NA, Polansky MM. Dietary chromium intake. Freely chosen diets, institutional diet, and individual foods. Biol Trace Elem Res 1992;32:117-21. [PubMed abstract]
    Wang ZQ, Cefalu WT. Current concepts about chromium supplementation in type 2 diabetes and insulin resistance. Curr Diab Rep 2010;10:145-51. [PubMed abstract]
    Dattilo AM, Miguel SG. Chromium in Health and Disease. Nutr Today 2003;38:121-33.
    Hamilton EM, Young SD, Bailey EH, Watts MJ. Chromium speciation in foodstuffs: A review. Food Chem 2018;250:105-12. [PubMed abstract]
    Vincent JB. Chromium: Properties and Determination In: Caballero B, Finglas PM, Toldra F, eds. Encyclopedia of Food and Health: Academic Press; 2016:114-8.
    Vincent JB. The Bioinorganic Chemistry of Chromium United Kingdom: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd; 2013.
    Kuligowski J, Halperin KM. Stainless steel cookware as a significant source of nickel, chromium, and iron. Arch Environ Contam Toxicol 1992;23:211-5. [PubMed abstract]
    Kozlovsky AS, Moser PB, Reiser S, Anderson RA. Effects of diets high in simple sugars on urinary chromium losses. Metabolism 1986;35:515-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Seaborn CD, Stoecker BJ. Effects of antacid or ascorbic acid on tissue accumulation and urinary excretion of 51chromium. Nutr Res 1990;10:1401-7.
    U. S. Food and Drug Administration. Food Labeling: Revision of the Nutrition and Supplement Facts Labels. 2016.
    National Institutes of Health. Dietary Supplement Label Database. 2020.
    Komorowski J, Juturu V. Chromium supplementation does not improve glucose tolerance, insulin sensitivity, or lipid profile: a randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind trial of supplementation in subjects with impaired glucose tolerance: response to Gunton et al. Diabetes Care 2005;28:1841-2; author reply 2-3. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Department of Agriculture and Agricultural Research Service. What We Eat In America. 2018.
    Anderson RA, Bryden NA, Polansky MM. Dietary intake of calcium, chromium, copper, iron, magnesium, manganese, and zinc: duplicate plate values corrected using derived nutrient intake. J Am Diet Assoc 1993;93:462-4. [PubMed abstract]
    Filippini T, Cilloni S, Malavolti M, Violi F, Malagoli C, Tesauro M, et al. Dietary intake of cadmium, chromium, copper, manganese, selenium and zinc in a Northern Italy community. J Trace Elem Med Biol 2018;50:508-17. [PubMed abstract]
    Brown RO, Forloines-Lynn S, Cross RE, Heizer WD. Chromium deficiency after long-term total parenteral nutrition. Dig Dis Sci 1986;31:661-4. [PubMed abstract]
    Freund H, Atamian S, Fischer JE. Chromium deficiency during total parenteral nutrition. JAMA 1979;241:496-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Jeejeebhoy KN, Chu RC, Marliss EB, Greenberg GR, Bruce-Robertson A. Chromium deficiency, glucose intolerance, and neuropathy reversed by chromium supplementation, in a patient receiving long-term total parenteral nutrition. Am J Clin Nutr 1977;30:531-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Fessler TA. Trace elements in parenteral nutrition: a practical guide for dosage and monitoring for adult patients. Nutr Clin Pract 2013;28:722-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Vanek VW, Borum P, Buchman A, Fessler TA, Howard L, Jeejeebhoy K, et al. A.S.P.E.N. position paper: recommendations for changes in commercially available parenteral multivitamin and multi-trace element products. Nutr Clin Pract 2012;27:440-91. [PubMed abstract]
    Anderson RA, Cheng N, Bryden NA, Polansky MM, Cheng N, Chi J, et al. Elevated intakes of supplemental chromium improve glucose and insulin variables in individuals with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes 1997;46:1786-91. [PubMed abstract]
    National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. The A1C Test & Diabetes. 2018.
    Costello RB, Dwyer JT, Bailey RL. Chromium supplements for glycemic control in type 2 diabetes: limited evidence of effectiveness. Nutr Rev 2016;74:455-68. [PubMed abstract]
    Cefalu WT, Rood J, Pinsonat P, Qin J, Sereda O, Levitan L, et al. Characterization of the metabolic and physiologic response to chromium supplementation in subjects with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Metabolism 2010;59:755-62. [PubMed abstract]
    U. S. Food and Drug Administration. Qualified Health Claims: Letters of Denial. 2005.
    Trumbo PR, Ellwood KC. Chromium picolinate intake and risk of type 2 diabetes: an evidence-based review by the United States Food and Drug Administration. Nutr Rev 2006;64:357-63. [PubMed abstract]
    American Diabetes Association. Standards of medical care in diabetes--2010. Diabetes care 2010;33 Suppl 1:S11-61. [PubMed abstract]
    American Diabetes Association. (4) Foundations of care: education, nutrition, physical activity, smoking cessation, psychosocial care, and immunization. Diabetes care 2015;38 Suppl:S20-30. [PubMed abstract]
    National Heart Lung and Blood Institute. Metabolic Syndrome. 2019.
    Iqbal N, Cardillo S, Volger S, Bloedon LT, Anderson RA, Boston R, et al. Chromium picolinate does not improve key features of metabolic syndrome in obese nondiabetic adults. Metab Syndr Relat Disord 2009;7:143-50. [PubMed abstract]
    Bai J, Xun P, Morris S, Jacobs DR, Jr., Liu K, He K. Chromium exposure and incidence of metabolic syndrome among American young adults over a 23-year follow-up: the CARDIA Trace Element Study. Sci Rep 2015;5:15606. [PubMed abstract]
    Ali A, Ma Y, Reynolds J, Wise JP, Sr., Inzucchi SE Katz DL (2011). Chromium effects on glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity in persons at risk for diabetes mellitus. Endocr Pract 17:16-25. [PubMed abstract]
    Nussbaumerova B, Rosolova H, Krizek M, Sefrna F, Racek J, Muller L, et al. Chromium supplementation reduces resting heart rate in patients with metabolic syndrome and impaired glucose tolerance. Biol Trace Elem Res 2018;183:192-199. [PubMed abstract]
    Kim HN, Kim SH, Eun YM, Song SW. Effects of zinc, magnesium, and chromium supplementation on cardiometabolic risk in adults with metabolic syndrome: A double-blind, placebo-controlled randomised trial. J Trace Elem Med Biol 2018;48:166-71. [PubMed abstract]
    Goldrat O, Delbaere A. PCOS: update and diagnostic approach. Clin Biochem 2018;62:24-31. [PubMed abstract]
    Fazelian S, Rouhani MH, Bank SS, Amani R. Chromium supplementation and polycystic ovary syndrome: A systematic review and meta-analysis. J Trace Elem Med Biol 2017;42:92-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Piotrowska A, Pilch W, Czerwinska-Ledwig O, Zuziak R, Siwek A, Wolak M, et al. The possibilities of using chromium salts as an agent supporting treatment of polycystic ovary syndrome. Biol Trace Elem Res 2019;192:91-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Tang XL, Sun Z, Gong L. Chromium supplementation in women with polycystic ovary syndrome: Systematic review and meta-analysis. J Obstet Gynaecol Res 2018;44:134-43. [PubMed abstract]
    Heshmati J, Omani-Samani R, Vesali S, Maroufizadeh S, Rezaeinejad M, Razavi M, et al. The effects of supplementation with chromium on insulin resistance indices in women with polycystic ovarian syndrome: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials. Horm Metab Res 2018;50:193-200. [PubMed abstract]
    Maleki V, Izadi A, Farsad-Naeimi A, Alizadeh M. Chromium supplementation does not improve weight loss or metabolic and hormonal variables in patients with polycystic ovary syndrome: A systematic review. Nutr Res 2018;56:1-10. [PubMed abstract]
    Paiva AN, Lima JG, Medeiros AC, Figueiredo HA, Andrade RL, Ururahy MA, et al. Beneficial effects of oral chromium picolinate supplementation on glycemic control in patients with type 2 diabetes: A randomized clinical study. J Trace Elem Med Biol 2015;32:66-72. [PubMed abstract]
    Jamilian M, Zadeh Modarres S, Amiri Siavashani M, Karimi M, Mafi A, Ostadmohammadi V, et al. (2018). The influences of chromium supplementation on glycemic control, markers of cardio-metabolic risk, and oxidative stress in infertile polycystic ovary syndrome women candidate for in vitro fertilization: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Biol Trace Elem Res 185(1): 48-55. [PubMed abstract]
    Gunton JE, Cheung NW, Hitchman R, Hams G, O'Sullivan C, Foster-Powell K, et al. Chromium supplementation does not improve glucose tolerance, insulin sensitivity, or lipid profile: a randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind trial of supplementation in subjects with impaired glucose tolerance. Diabetes Care 2005;28:712-3. [PubMed abstract]
    Balk EM, Tatsioni A, Lichtenstein AH, Lau J, Pittas AG. Effect of chromium supplementation on glucose metabolism and lipids: a systematic review of randomized controlled trials. Diabetes Care 2007;30:2154-63. [PubMed abstract]
    Patal PC, Cardino MT, Jimeno CA. A meta-analysis on the effect of chromium picolinate on glucose and lipid profiles among patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Philipp J Intern Med 2010;48:32-7.
    Abdollahi M, Farshchi A, Nikfar S, Seyedifar M. Effect of chromium on glucose and lipid profiles in patients with type 2 diabetes; a meta-analysis review of randomized trials. J Pharm Pharm Sci 2013;16:99-114. [PubMed abstract]
    Suksomboon N, Poolsup N, Yuwanakorn A. Systematic review and meta-analysis of the efficacy and safety of chromium supplementation in diabetes. J Clin Pharm Ther 2014;39:292-306. [PubMed abstract]
    Huang H, Chen G, Dong Y, Zhu Y, Chen H. Chromium supplementation for adjuvant treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus: Results from a pooled analysis. Mol Nutr Food Res 2018;62. [PubMed abstract]
    Anton SD, Morrison CD, Cefalu WT, Martin CK, Coulon S, Geiselman P, et al. Effects of chromium picolinate on food intake and satiety. Diabetes Technol Ther 2008;10:405-12. [PubMed abstract]
    Manore MM. Dietary supplements for improving body composition and reducing body weight: where is the evidence? Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab 2012;22:139-54. [PubMed abstract]
    Tian H, Guo X, Wang X, He Z, Sun R, Ge S, et al. Chromium picolinate supplementation for overweight or obese adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2013:Cd010063. [PubMed abstract]
    Willoughby D, Hewlings S, Kalman D. Body composition changes in weight loss: strategies and supplementation for maintaining lean body mass, a brief review. Nutrients 2018;10. [PubMed abstract]
    Lukaski HC. Effects of chromium (III) as a nutritional supplement. In: Vincent JB, ed. The Nutritional Biochemistry of Chromium (III). Cambridge, MA: Elsevier; 2019:61-77.
    Tsang C, Taghizadeh M, Aghabagheri E, Asemi Z, Jafarnejad S. A meta-analysis of the effect of chromium supplementation on anthropometric indices of subjects with overweight or obesity. Clin Obes 2019;9:e12313. [PubMed abstract]
    Onakpoya I, Posadzki P, Ernst E. Chromium supplementation in overweight and obesity: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials. Obes Rev 2013;14:496-507. [PubMed abstract]
    Pittler MH, Stevinson C, Ernst E. Chromium picolinate for reducing body weight: meta-analysis of randomized trials. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord 2003;27:522-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Fowler JF, Jr. Systemic contact dermatitis caused by oral chromium picolinate. Cutis 2000;65:116. [PubMed abstract]
    Vincent JB. The potential value and toxicity of chromium picolinate as a nutritional supplement, weight loss agent and muscle development agent. Sports Med 2003;33:213-30. [PubMed abstract]
    Martin J, Wang ZQ, Zhang XH, Wachtel D, Volaufova J, Matthews DE, et al. Chromium picolinate supplementation attenuates body weight gain and increases insulin sensitivity in subjects with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2006;29:1826-32. [PubMed abstract]
    Cefalu WT, Bell-Farrow AD, Stegner J, Wang ZQ, King T, Morgan T, et al. Effect of chromium picolinate on insulin sensitivity in vivo. J Trace Elem Exp Med 1999;12:71-83.
    Natural Medicines TRC. Chromium. 2020.
    John-Kalarickal J, Pearlman G, Carlson HE. New medications which decrease levothyroxine absorption. Thyroid 2007;17:763-5. [PubMed abstract]

Disclaimer

This fact sheet by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Office of Dietary Supplements (ODS) provides information that should not take the place of medical advice. We encourage you to talk to your health care providers (doctor, registered dietitian, pharmacist, etc.) about your interest in, questions about, or use of dietary supplements and what may be best for your overall health. Any mention in this publication of a specific product or service, or recommendation from an organization or professional society, does not represent an endorsement by ODS of that product, service, or expert advice.

Updated: June 2, 2022

 Copper: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals (original version)
Copper: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals
Table of Contents

    Introduction
    Recommended Intakes
    Sources of Copper
    Copper Intakes and Status
    Copper Deficiency
    Groups at Risk of Copper Inadequacy
    Copper and Health
    Health Risks from Excessive Copper
    Interactions with Copper
    Copper and Healthful Diets
    References
    Disclaimer

Introduction

Copper, an essential mineral, is naturally present in some foods and is available as a dietary supplement. It is a cofactor for several enzymes (known as cuproenzymes) involved in energy production, iron metabolism, neuropeptide activation, connective tissue synthesis, and neurotransmitter synthesis [1-3]. One abundant cuproenzyme is ceruloplasmin (CP), which plays a role in iron metabolism and carries more than 95% of the total copper in healthy human plasma [4]. Copper is also involved in many physiologic processes, such as angiogenesis; neurohormone homeostasis; and regulation of gene expression, brain development, pigmentation, and immune system functioning [1]. In addition, defense against oxidative damage depends mainly on the copper-containing superoxide dismutases [5,6].

A wide variety of plant and animal foods contain copper, and the average human diet provides approximately 1,400 mcg/day for men and 1,100 mcg/day for women that is primarily absorbed in the upper small intestine [1,2,7-9]. Almost two-thirds of the body’s copper is located in the skeleton and muscle [1,3].

Only small amounts of copper are typically stored in the body, and the average adult has a total body content of 50–120 mg copper [1,2]. Most copper is excreted in bile, and a small amount is excreted in urine. Total fecal losses of copper of biliary origin and nonabsorbed dietary copper are about 1 mg/day [1,2]. Copper levels in the body are homeostatically maintained by copper absorption from the intestine and copper release by the liver into bile to provide protection from copper deficiency and toxicity [3].

Copper status is not routinely assessed in clinical practice, and no biomarkers that accurately and reliably assess copper status have been identified [2]. Human studies typically measure copper and cuproenzyme activity in plasma and blood cells because individuals with known copper deficiency often have low blood levels of copper and CP [2]. However, plasma CP and copper levels can be influenced by other factors, such as estrogen status, pregnancy, infection, inflammation, and some cancers [2]. Normal serum concentrations are 10–25 mcmol/L (63.5–158.9 mcg/dL) for copper and 180–400 mg/L for CP [10].
Recommended Intakes

Intake recommendations for copper and other nutrients are provided in the Dietary Reference Intakes (DRIs) developed by the Food and Nutrition Board (FNB) at the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine [3]. DRI is the general term for a set of reference values used for planning and assessing nutrient intakes of healthy people. These values, which vary by age and sex, include the following:

    Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA): Average daily level of intake sufficient to meet the nutrient requirements of nearly all (97%–98%) healthy individuals; often used to plan nutritionally adequate diets for individuals
    Adequate Intake (AI): Intake at this level is assumed to ensure nutritional adequacy; established when evidence is insufficient to develop an RDA
    Estimated Average Requirement (EAR): Average daily level of intake estimated to meet the requirements of 50% of healthy individuals; usually used to assess the nutrient intakes of groups of people and to plan nutritionally adequate diets for them; can also be used to assess the nutrient intakes of individuals
    Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL): Maximum daily intake unlikely to cause adverse health effects

Table 1 lists the current RDAs for copper [3]. For infants from birth to 12 months, the FNB established an AI for copper that is equivalent to the mean intake of copper in healthy, breastfed infants.
Table 1: Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDAs) for Copper [3] Age 	Male 	Female 	Pregnancy 	Lactation
Birth to 6 months* 	200 mcg 	200 mcg 		
7–12 months* 	220 mcg 	220 mcg 		
1–3 years 	340 mcg 	340 mcg 		
4–8 years 	440 mcg 	440 mcg 		
9–13 years 	700 mcg 	700 mcg 		
14–18 years 	890 mcg 	890 mcg 	1,000 mcg 	1,300 mcg
19+ years 	900 mcg 	900 mcg 	1,000 mcg 	1,300 mcg
*Adequate Intake (AI)
 
Sources of Copper
Food

The richest dietary copper sources include shellfish, seeds and nuts, organ meats, wheat-bran cereals, whole-grain products, and chocolate [1,2]. The absorption of copper is strongly influenced by the amount of copper in the diet; bioavailability ranges from 75% of dietary copper when the diet contains only 400 mcg/day to 12% when the diet contains 7.5 mg/day [3].

Tap water and other beverages can also be sources of copper, although the amount of copper in these liquids varies by source (ranging from 0.0005 mg/L to 1 mg/L) [2,11].

Several food sources of copper are listed in Table 2.
Table 2: Copper Content of Selected Foods [12] Food 	Micrograms
(mcg) per
serving 	Percent
DV*
Beef, liver, pan fried (3 ounces) 	12,400 	1,378
Oysters, eastern, wild, cooked, 3 ounces 	4,850 	539
Baking chocolate, unsweetened, 1 ounce 	938 	104
Potatoes, cooked, flesh and skin, 1 medium potato 	675 	75
Mushrooms, shiitake, cooked, cut pieces, ½ cup 	650 	72
Cashew nuts, dry roasted, 1 ounce 	629 	70
Crab, Dungeness, cooked, 3 ounces 	624 	69
Sunflower seed kernels, toasted, ¼ cup 	615 	68
Turkey, giblets, simmered, 3 ounces 	588 	65
Chocolate, dark, 70%–85% cacao solids, 1 ounce 	501 	56
Tofu, raw, firm, ½ cup 	476 	53
Chickpeas, mature sees, ½ cup 	289 	32
Millet, cooked, 1 cup 	280 	31
Salmon, Atlantic, wild, cooked, 3 ounces 	273 	30
Pasta, whole wheat, cooked, 1 cup (not packed) 	263 	29
Avocado, raw, ½ cup 	219 	24
Figs, dried, ½ cup 	214 	24
Spinach, boiled, drained, ½ cup 	157 	17
Asparagus, cooked, drained, ½ cup 	149 	17
Sesame seeds, ¼ cup 	147 	16
Turkey, ground, cooked, 3 ounces 	128 	14
Cereal, Cream of Wheat, cooked with water, stove top, 1 cup 	104 	12
Tomatoes, raw, chopped, ½ cup 	53 	6
Yogurt, Greek, plain, low fat, 7-ounce container 	42 	5
Milk, nonfat, 1 cup 	27 	3
Apples, raw, with skin, ½ cup slices 	17 	2

*DV = Daily Value. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) developed DVs to help consumers compare the nutrient contents of foods and dietary supplements within the context of a total diet. The DV for copper is 0.9 mg (900 mcg) for adults and children age 4 years and older [13]. FDA does not require food labels to list copper content unless copper has been added to the food. Foods providing 20% or more of the DV are considered to be high sources of a nutrient, but foods providing lower percentages of the DV also contribute to a healthful diet.

The U.S. Department of Agriculture’s (USDA’s) FoodData Central [12] lists the nutrient content of many foods.
Dietary supplements

Copper is available in dietary supplements containing only copper, in supplements containing copper in combination with other ingredients, and in many multivitamin/mineral products [14]. These supplements contain many different forms of copper, including cupric oxide, cupric sulfate, copper amino acid chelates, and copper gluconate. To date, no studies have compared the bioavailability of copper from these and other forms [15]. The amount of copper in dietary supplements typically ranges from a few micrograms to 15 mg (about 17 times the DV for copper) [14].
Copper Intakes and Status

Typical diets in the United States meet or exceed the copper RDA. Mean dietary intakes of copper from foods range from 800 to 1,000 mcg per day for children age 2–19 [9]. In adults age 20 and older, average daily intakes of copper from food are 1,400 mcg for men and 1,100 mcg for women. Total intakes from supplements and foods are 900 to 1,100 mcg/day for children and 1,400 to 1,700 mcg/day for adults age 20 and over.

According to an analysis of data from the 2009–2012 National Health and Nutrition Survey (NHANES), 6% to 15% of adults age 19 and older who do not take dietary supplements containing copper have copper intakes below the EAR [16]. In those who do use supplements, rates of adults with intakes below the copper EAR range from 2.2% to 7.2%.
Copper Deficiency

Copper deficiency is uncommon in humans [2]. Based on studies in animals and humans, the effects of copper deficiency include anemia, hypopigmentation, hypercholesterolemia, connective tissue disorders, osteoporosis and other bone defects, abnormal lipid metabolism, ataxia, and increased risk of infection [1,17,18].
Groups at Risk of Copper Inadequacy

The following groups are most likely to have inadequate copper status.
People with celiac disease

In a study of 200 adults and children with celiac disease, of which 69.9% claimed to maintain a gluten-free diet, 15% had copper deficiency (less than 70 mcg/dL in serum in men and girls younger than 12 years and less than 80 mcg/dL in women older than 12 years and/or CP less than 170 mg/L) as a result of intestinal malabsorption resulting from the intestinal lining alterations associated with celiac disease [19]. In its 2009 clinical guidelines for celiac disease, the American College of Gastroenterology notes that people with celiac disease appear to have an increased risk of copper deficiency and that copper levels normalize within a month of adequate copper supplementation while eating a gluten-free diet [20].
People with Menkes disease

Menkes disease is a rare, X-linked, recessive disorder of copper homeostasis caused by ATP7A mutations, which encode a copper-transporting ATPase [1]. In these individuals, intestinal absorption of dietary copper drops sharply, leading to signs of copper deficiency, including low serum copper and CP levels [1,21]. The typical manifestations of Menkes disease include failure to thrive, impaired cognitive development, aortic aneurysms, seizures, and unusually kinky hair [22]. Most individuals with Menkes disease die by age 3 years if untreated, but subcutaneous injections of copper starting in the first few weeks after birth can reduce mortality risk and improve development [23].
People taking high doses of zinc supplements

High dietary intakes of zinc can interfere with copper absorption, and excessive use of zinc supplements can lead to copper deficiency. Reductions in erythrocyte copper-zinc superoxide dismutase, a marker of copper status, have been reported with even moderately high zinc intakes of approximately 60 mg/day for up to 10 weeks [3]. People who regularly consume high doses of zinc from supplements or use excessive amounts of zinc-containing denture creams can develop copper deficiency because zinc can inhibit copper absorption. This is one reason the FNB established the UL for zinc at 40 mg/day for adults [1,3].
Copper and Health

This section focuses on two diseases in which copper might play a role: cardiovascular disease (CVD) and Alzheimer’s disease.
Cardiovascular disease

Copper deficiency leads to changes in blood lipid levels, a risk factor for atherosclerotic CVD [1]. Animal studies have shown that copper deficiency is associated with cardiac abnormalities, possibly because of the resulting decreases in the activity of several cardiac cuproenzymes [1,2].

However, observational studies of the link between copper concentrations and CVD have had mixed results. A representative cohort study of 1,197 asymptomatic adults age 45 to 64 in Italy assessed the effects of self-reported copper intakes on various metabolic markers, including markers of atherosclerotic disease risk (diastolic blood pressure, total and low-density lipoprotein [LDL] levels) [24]. Diastolic blood pressure, total cholesterol, and LDL cholesterol levels were significantly lower in the highest tertile of copper intake (2.29 mg/day) compared with the lowest tertile (1.12 mg/day). In contrast, an analysis of 1976–1992 data on 4,574 participants in the second NHANES found that the risk of death from coronary heart disease was 2.87 times higher for participants age 30 and older in the fourth quartile for serum copper concentration (137 mcg/dL or higher) than for those in the first quartile (less than 106 mcg/dL) [25]. Similarly, an analysis of data on 3,253 adults with acute coronary syndromes (mean age 62 years in the 70% who were male and 65 years in the 30% who were female) in a cardiovascular health study in Germany found higher hazard ratios—2.58 for copper and 3.02 for CP concentrations in serum—for death from CVD in the highest (mean 147 mcg/dL for copper, 38.3 mg/dL for CP) versus the lowest (81.6 mcg/dL for copper, 22.9 mg/dL for CP) quartiles [26].

A few small studies that assessed the impact of copper supplementation in healthy adults have found little evidence that supplementation affects CVD risk factors. For example, daily supplementation with 2 mg copper as copper glycinate for 8 weeks in 70 healthy adults age 45 to 60 years increased the activity of two cuproenzymes, erythrocyte superoxide dismutase 1 and plasma CP, but had no effect on five other CVD-related plasma markers (CRP, homocysteine, total cholesterol, high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, and LDL cholesterol) [27]. In 16 healthy women (mean age 24 years), daily supplementation with 3 mg or 6 mg elemental copper as copper sulfate had no significant effect on CVD risk factors, including total plasma cholesterol or triacylglycerol concentrations [28]. However, the concentration of fibrinolytic factor PAI-I decreased by about 30% (indicating reduced CVD risk) with 6 mg/day copper supplementation compared with placebo. No clinical trials of copper supplementation have been conducted in people with increased CVD risk.

Overall, the evidence to date is insufficient to support any conclusions about the association between copper concentrations and CVD risk or the impact of copper supplementation on CVD.
Alzheimer’s disease

Some experts believe that dietary copper deficiency plays a role in the etiology and pathophysiology of Alzheimer’s disease, the leading cause of dementia, because of several reports of low copper levels and low activity of copper-dependent enzymes in the brains of people with the disease [7,29]. Limited evidence shows that people with higher copper levels have a lower risk of Alzheimer’s disease [30]. However, high levels of copper have also been found in the brains of people with Alzheimer’s disease, and some researchers argue that excess amounts of dietary copper are involved in the development of this disease [31]. Furthermore, copper accumulation in damaged brain regions in Alzheimer’s disease might not directly reflect overall body copper status or copper intakes [32].

A few observational studies have assessed the relationship between dietary copper levels and Alzheimer’s disease, with mixed results. One study, for example, assessed cognitive function using four cognitive tests during home visits every 3 years for 6 years and intakes of copper and saturated and trans fats using a food frequency questionnaire in 3,718 community-dwelling (noninstitutionalized) adults age 65 and older [33]. In the overall study population, dietary and total copper intakes were not associated with cognitive decline. However, in 604 participants (16.2%) who consumed a diet higher in saturated and trans fat, total copper intake in the highest quintile (median 2.75 mg/day) was associated with a significantly faster rate of cognitive decline compared with the lowest intake quintile (median 0.88 mg/day). In contrast, an analysis of data on 1,112 adults older than 60 years found no differences in serum copper or CP levels between patients with Alzheimer’s disease (n=211) and healthy controls (n=695) [32]. This study did reveal, however, a significant decline in serum copper not bound to CP in patients with mild cognitive impairment or Alzheimer’s disease compared with the healthy control group 18 months after baseline.

Meta-analyses have found that people with Alzheimer’s disease tend to have higher serum copper levels than adults without the disease. In a meta-analysis of 10 studies in 867 healthy individuals and 599 with Alzheimer’s disease (mean age greater than 70 years in both groups), patients with Alzheimer’s disease had significantly higher serum levels of copper not bound to CP and total serum copper than healthy controls [34]. In an earlier meta-analysis of 26 studies in a total of 1,058 patients with Alzheimer’s disease and 932 controls, those with Alzheimer’s disease had significantly higher levels of serum copper than the healthy controls [35].

Very little clinical evidence is available on the impact of copper supplementation in patients with Alzheimer’s disease. One clinical trial that randomly assigned 68 patients age 50 to 80 years with mild Alzheimer’s disease to supplementation with 8 mg copper daily or placebo for 12 months found no significant differences in cognition between groups [36].

Experts participating in the 2013 International Conference on Nutrition and the Brain suggested that individuals at increased risk of Alzheimer’s disease using multivitamin/mineral supplements choose those that have no copper (or iron) because excessive intakes of these minerals could contribute to cognitive issues in some patients [37]. However, much more research is needed to determine whether high or low levels of serum or plasma copper are associated with Alzheimer’s disease risk and whether supplements containing copper could affect Alzheimer’s disease risk or symptoms.
Health Risks from Excessive Copper

Chronic exposure to high levels of copper can result in liver damage and gastrointestinal symptoms (e.g., abdominal pain, cramps, nausea, diarrhea, and vomiting) [10,38]. Copper toxicity is rare in healthy individuals who do not have a hereditary copper homeostasis defect. However, copper toxicity has been reported in people who consume water containing high levels of copper as a result of stagnant water in copper-containing pipes and fixtures as well as copper alloys in water distribution systems and household plumbing that allow copper to leach into water [10,38]. The Environmental Protection Agency has established a recommended upper limit for copper in public water systems of 1.3 mg/L [38,39].

People with Wilson’s disease, a rare, autosomal recessive disease, have a high risk of copper toxicity. Wilson’s disease, which is caused by a mutation in ATP7B, leads to abnormally high tissue levels of copper as a result of defective copper clearance [40]. People with this disease can develop neurologic and liver damage that can result in cirrhosis [1]. Patients can also develop acute hepatitis, hemolytic crisis, and liver failure. Lifelong copper chelation therapy or high doses of zinc can prevent permanent organ damage in these patients.

The FNB has established ULs for copper from food and supplements for healthy individuals based on levels associated with liver damage [10]. The ULs do not apply to individuals who are receiving supplemental copper under medical supervision.
Table 3: Tolerable Upper Intake Levels (ULs) for Copper [10] Age 	Male 	Female 	Pregnancy 	Lactation
Birth to 6 months 	None established* 	None established* 		
7–12 months 	None established* 	None established* 		
1–3 years 	1,000 mcg 	1,000 mcg 		
4–8 years 	3,000 mcg 	3,000 mcg 		
9–13 years 	5,000 mcg 	5,000 mcg 		
14–18 years 	8,000 mcg 	8,000 mcg 	8,000 mcg 	8,000 mcg
19+ years 	10,000 mcg 	10,000 mcg 	10,000 mcg 	10,000 mcg

* Breast milk, formula, and food should be the only sources of copper for infants.
Interactions with Copper

Copper is not known to have any clinically relevant interactions with medications.
Copper and Healthful Diets

The federal government's 2020–2025 Dietary Guidelines for Americans notes that "Because foods provide an array of nutrients and other components that have benefits for health, nutritional needs should be met primarily through foods. ... In some cases, fortified foods and dietary supplements are useful when it is not possible otherwise to meet needs for one or more nutrients (e.g., during specific life stages such as pregnancy)."

For more information about building a healthy dietary pattern, refer to the Dietary Guidelines for Americans and the USDA's MyPlate.

The Dietary Guidelines for Americans describes a healthy dietary pattern as one that

    Includes a variety of vegetables; fruits; grains (at least half whole grains); fat-free and low-fat milk, yogurt, and cheese; and oils.

        Some vegetables, fruits, grains, and dairy products contain copper.

    Includes a variety of protein foods such as lean meats; poultry; eggs; seafood; beans, peas, and lentils; nuts and seeds; and soy products.

        Some organ meats, seafoods, and nuts and seeds are rich in copper, and other types of meats, fish, and beans contain copper.

    Limits foods and beverages higher in added sugars, saturated fat, and sodium.

    Limits alcoholic beverages.

    Stays within your daily calorie needs.

References

    Collins JF. Copper. In: Ross AC, Caballero B, Cousins RJ, Tucker KL, Ziegler TR, eds. Modern Nutrition in Health and Disease. 11th ed. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2014:206-16.
    Prohaska JR. Copper. In: Erdman JW, Macdonald IA, Zeisel SH, eds. Present Knowledge in Nutrition. 10th ed. Washington, DC: Wiley-Blackwell; 2012:540-53.
    Institute of Medicine, Food and Nutrition Board. Dietary Reference Intakes for Vitamin A, Vitamin K, Arsenic, Boron, Chromium, Copper, Iodine, Iron, Manganese, Molybdenum, Nickel, Silicon, Vanadium, and Zinc. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2001.
    Hellman NE, Gitlin JD. Ceruloplasmin metabolism and function. Annu Rev Nutr 2002;22:439-58. [PubMed abstract]
    Allen KG, Klevay LM. Copper: an antioxidant nutrient for cardiovascular health. Curr Opin Lipidol 1994;5:22-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Owen CAJ. Biochemical Aspects of Copper: Copper Proteins, Ceruloplasmin, and Copper Protein Binding. Park Ridge, NJ: Noyes Publications; 1982.
    Klevay LM. Copper. In: Coates PM, Betz JM, Blackman MR, et al., eds. Encyclopedia of Dietary Supplements. 2nd ed. London and New York: Informa Healthcare; 2010:604-11.
    Klevay LM. Is the Western diet adequate in copper? J Trace Elem Med Biol 2011;25:204-12. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service. What We Eat in America, 2013-2014. 2017.
    Institute of Medicine. Food and Nutrition Board. Dietary Reference Intakes: Thiamin, Riboflavin, Niacin, Vitamin B6, Folate, Vitamin B12, Pantothenic Acid, Biotin, and Choline. Washington, DC: National Academy Press; 1998.
    World Health Organization. Copper in Drinking-Water. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2004.
    U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service. FoodData Central, 2019.
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Food Labeling: Revision of the Nutrition and Supplement Facts Labels. 2016.
    National Institutes of Health. Dietary Supplement Label Database. 2018.
    Rosado JL. Zinc and copper: proposed fortification levels and recommended zinc compounds. J Nutr 2003;133:2985S-9S. [PubMed abstract]
    Blumberg JB, Frei B, Fulgoni VL, Weaver CM, Zeisel SH. Contribution of Dietary Supplements to Nutritional Adequacy in Various Adult Age Groups. Nutrients 2017;9. [PubMed abstract]
    Fairweather-Tait SJ, Harvey LJ, Collings R. Risk-benefit analysis of mineral intakes: case studies on copper and iron. Proc Nutr Soc 2011;70:1-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Prohaska JR. Impact of copper deficiency in humans. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2014;1314:1-5. [PubMed abstract]
    Botero-Lopez JE, Araya M, Parada A, Mendez MA, Pizarro F, Espinosa N, et al. Micronutrient deficiencies in patients with typical and atypical celiac disease. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr 2011;53:265-70. [PubMed abstract]
    Rubio-Tapia A, Hill ID, Kelly CP, Calderwood AH, Murray JA, American College of Gastroenterology. ACG clinical guidelines: diagnosis and management of celiac disease. Am J Gastroenterol 2013;108:656-76; quiz 77. [PubMed abstract]
    Costa LS, Pegler SP, Lellis RF, Krebs VL, Robertson S, Morgan T, et al. Menkes disease: importance of diagnosis with molecular analysis in the neonatal period. Rev Assoc Med Bras (1992) 2015;61:407-10. [PubMed abstract]
    Hordyjewska A, Popiolek L, Kocot J. The many "faces" of copper in medicine and treatment. Biometals 2014;27:611-21. [PubMed abstract]
    Kaler SG. Neurodevelopment and brain growth in classic Menkes disease is influenced by age and symptomatology at initiation of copper treatment. J Trace Elem Med Biol 2014;28:427-30. [PubMed abstract]
    Bo S, Durazzo M, Gambino R, Berutti C, Milanesio N, Caropreso A, et al. Associations of dietary and serum copper with inflammation, oxidative stress, and metabolic variables in adults. J Nutr 2008;138:305-10. [PubMed abstract]
    Ford ES. Serum copper concentration and coronary heart disease among US adults. Am J Epidemiol 2000;151:1182-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Grammer TB, Kleber ME, Silbernagel G, Pilz S, Scharnagl H, Lerchbaum E, et al. Copper, ceruloplasmin, and long-term cardiovascular and total mortality (the Ludwigshafen Risk and Cardiovascular Health Study). Free Radic Res 2014;48:706-15. [PubMed abstract]
    DiSilvestro RA, Joseph EL, Zhang W, Raimo AE, Kim YM. A randomized trial of copper supplementation effects on blood copper enzyme activities and parameters related to cardiovascular health. Metabolism 2012;61:1242-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Bugel S, Harper A, Rock E, O'Connor JM, Bonham MP, Strain JJ. Effect of copper supplementation on indices of copper status and certain CVD risk markers in young healthy women. Br J Nutr 2005;94:231-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Klevay LM. Alzheimer's disease as copper deficiency. Med Hypotheses 2008;70:802-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Siotto M, Simonelli I, Pasqualetti P, Mariani S, Caprara D, Bucossi S, et al. Association Between Serum Ceruloplasmin Specific Activity and Risk of Alzheimer's Disease. J Alzheimers Dis 2016;50:1181-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Lanza V, Milardi D, Di Natale G, Pappalardo G. Repurposing of Copper(II)-chelating Drugs for the Treatment of Neurodegenerative Diseases. Curr Med Chem 2018;25:525-39. [PubMed abstract]
    Rembach A, Doecke JD, Roberts BR, Watt AD, Faux NG, Volitakis I, et al. Longitudinal analysis of serum copper and ceruloplasmin in Alzheimer's disease. J Alzheimers Dis 2013;34:171-82. [PubMed abstract]
    Morris MC, Evans DA, Tangney CC, Bienias JL, Schneider JA, Wilson RS, et al. Dietary copper and high saturated and trans fat intakes associated with cognitive decline. Arch Neurol 2006;63:1085-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Squitti R, Simonelli I, Ventriglia M, Siotto M, Pasqualetti P, Rembach A, et al. Meta-analysis of serum non-ceruloplasmin copper in Alzheimer's disease. J Alzheimers Dis 2014;38:809-22. [PubMed abstract]
    Bucossi S, Ventriglia M, Panetta V, Salustri C, Pasqualetti P, Mariani S, et al. Copper in Alzheimer's disease: a meta-analysis of serum,plasma, and cerebrospinal fluid studies. J Alzheimers Dis 2011;24:175-85. [PubMed abstract]
    Kessler H, Bayer TA, Bach D, Schneider-Axmann T, Supprian T, Herrmann W, et al. Intake of copper has no effect on cognition in patients with mild Alzheimer's disease: a pilot phase 2 clinical trial. J Neural Transm (Vienna) 2008;115:1181-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Barnard ND, Bush AI, Ceccarelli A, Cooper J, de Jager CA, Erickson KI, et al. Dietary and lifestyle guidelines for the prevention of Alzheimer's disease. Neurobiol Aging 2014;35 Suppl 2:S74-8. [PubMed abstract]
    National Research Council Committee on Copper in Drinking Water. Copper in Drinking Water. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2000.
    Environmental Protection Agency. Electronic Code of Federal Regulations, Title 40, Part 141. 2007.
    Trocello JM, Broussolle E, Girardot-Tinant N, Pelosse M, Lachaux A, Lloyd C, et al. Wilson's disease, 100 years later. Rev Neurol (Paris) 2013;169:936-43. [PubMed abstract]

Disclaimer

This fact sheet by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Office of Dietary Supplements (ODS) provides information that should not take the place of medical advice. We encourage you to talk to your health care providers (doctor, registered dietitian, pharmacist, etc.) about your interest in, questions about, or use of dietary supplements and what may be best for your overall health. Any mention in this publication of a specific product or service, or recommendation from an organization or professional society, does not represent an endorsement by ODS of that product, service, or expert advice.

Updated: October 18, 2022


 Dietary Supplements in the Time of COVID-19: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals (original version)
Dietary Supplements in the Time of COVID-19: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals
Table of Contents

    Introduction
    Andrographis
    Echinacea
    Elderberry (European Elder)
    Ginseng
    Magnesium
    Melatonin
    N-acetylcysteine
    Omega-3 fatty acids
    Probiotics
    Quercetin
    Selenium
    Vitamin C
    Vitamin D
    Vitamin E
    Zinc
    References
    Disclaimer

Data are insufficient to support recommendations for or against the use of any vitamin, mineral, herb or other botanical, fatty acid, or other dietary supplement ingredient to prevent or treat COVID-19.
Introduction

COVID-19, the disease caused by the novel severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), emerged in 2019 and caused a global pandemic [1]. Common initial signs and symptoms include cough, fever, fatigue, headache, muscle aches and pain, and diarrhea [2]. Some individuals with COVID-19 become severely ill, usually starting about 1 week after symptom onset; severe COVID-19 often involves progressive respiratory failure and may also result in life-threatening pneumonia, multiorgan failure, and death [2,3]. In addition, many individuals who have had COVID-19 report symptoms of post-acute sequelae of COVID (including breathlessness, cough, fatigue, muscle aches and weakness, sleep difficulties, and cognitive dysfunction), commonly known as long COVID, for weeks, months, or years after the acute stage of illness has passed [4-8]. The risk of long COVID appears to be higher in people who are hospitalized following SARS-CoV-2 infection compared with those who have less severe disease. It also appears to be higher in those who are not vaccinated against COVID-19 compared with those who are vaccinated [4].

Currently, data are insufficient to support recommendations for or against the use of any vitamin, mineral, herb, fatty acid, or other dietary supplement ingredient to prevent or treat COVID-19 [9]. Nevertheless, the sales of dietary supplements marketed to support immune health increased after the emergence of COVID-19 [10,11]. By law, dietary supplements are not allowed to be marketed as a treatment, prevention, or cure for any disease; only drugs can legally make such claims [12].

The immune system defends the body from pathogens that cause disease and is comprised of innate responses, which are the first line of defense, and adaptive responses, which become engaged later [13-15].

The innate immune system includes physical barriers, such as the skin and gut epithelium, that help prevent pathogen entry. It also includes leukocytes (white blood cells)—such as neutrophils, macrophages (which release cytokines), and natural killer cells—that attempt to find and eliminate foreign pathogens. However, these components are nonspecific, meaning that unlike the adaptive immune system, they do not recognize and respond to specific pathogens [13,14].

The adaptive immune system is pathogen specific and consists of B lymphocytes (B cells) that secrete antibodies into the blood and tissues (a process known as humoral immunity) and T lymphocytes (T cells) that destroy infected cells (a process known as cell-mediated immunity) [15]. The adaptive response takes several days or weeks to develop, but it generates immunological memory; as a result, a subsequent exposure to the same pathogen leads to a vigorous and rapid immune response [13,15]. Vaccinations enable the adaptive immune system to protect the body from exposures to the same pathogen in the future [14].

The body’s immune response to pathogens leads to inflammation, causing redness, swelling, heat, pain, and a loss of tissue function [16]. Inflammation helps eliminate the pathogen and initiate the healing process, but it can also cause symptoms and severe pathologies [16,17]. For example, the activation of CD8 T cells as part of the adaptive immune response can increase inflammation and cause pulmonary damage. This process can lead to acute respiratory distress syndrome, which has occurred in some patients with COVID-19 [17]. Other signs of inflammation that can appear in patients with COVID-19 include elevated levels of C-reactive protein and interleukin-6 [2]. Some patients with COVID-19 experience a cytokine storm, a critical condition caused by the excessive production of inflammatory cytokines, including tumor necrosis factor-alpha, interleukin-1 beta, and interleukin-6 [3,18]. This condition increases disease severity and the risk of death, so tempering the body’s inflammatory response is an important component of COVID-19 management.

People require several vitamins and minerals—including vitamin C, vitamin D, and zinc—for proper immune function, and clinical deficiencies of these nutrients can increase susceptibility to infections [9,14,19]. Other dietary supplement ingredients, such as botanicals and probiotics, do not have essential roles in the body but might affect immune function.

Some studies have investigated whether dietary supplement ingredients might enhance immune function in people with COVID-19. However, measuring the impact that vitamins, minerals, and other dietary supplement ingredients have on the immune system is difficult because the immune system is a complex network of organs, tissues, and cells. Immune function can be assessed indirectly by examining a person’s risk of infectious diseases and the severity of their symptoms, but there is no single method for directly measuring immune system function and resistance to disease [20,21]. This can make it difficult to interpret the results of clinical trials that evaluate the use of supplements in people with COVID-19. In addition, many of these trials were exploratory, had small sample sizes, were not randomized or placebo controlled, and used varying supplement doses and formulations [22-24].

Other studies have examined the associations between serum or plasma concentrations of vitamins or minerals and the risk of COVID-19 or disease severity. However, serum or plasma nutrient concentrations might not reflect body stores [25]. Furthermore, the onset of disease can alter nutrient concentrations [26,27]; it cannot be assumed that the nutrient concentrations observed in these studies contributed to the onset of COVID-19 or its severity.

This fact sheet summarizes the state of the science on the safety and efficacy of several dietary supplements. Ingredients are presented in alphabetical order. In addition, this fact sheet briefly discusses interactions between dietary supplement ingredients and medications. However, especially for botanicals, this information is often based on individual case reports and theoretical interactions derived from animal studies, cellular assays, or other indirect evidence. In most cases, potential interactions have not been adequately evaluated in clinical settings [28,29].
Andrographis

Andrographis paniculata, also known as Chuān Xīn Lián, is an herb that is native to subtropical and Southeast Asia [30]. Its leaves and other aerial (above ground) parts are used in traditional Ayurvedic, Chinese, and Thai medicine for relieving symptoms of the common cold, influenza, and other respiratory tract infections [31-34]. The active constituents of andrographis are believed to be andrographolide and its derivatives, which are diterpene lactones that might have antiviral, anti-inflammatory, and immune-stimulating effects [30,32,34-39].
Efficacy

Because studies conducted before the emergence of COVID-19 suggested that andrographis supplementation might reduce the severity of respiratory tract infections [32,33,40,41], some researchers have investigated whether andrographis might have a similar effect on COVID-19.

A few in vitro studies suggest that andrographolide isolated from andrographis might bind the main protease of SARS-CoV-2, thereby inhibiting its replication, transcription, and host cell recognition [37,38,42,43]. In a small clinical trial in Thailand, researchers examined the effects of 60 mg or 100 mg andrographis extract (called Fah Talai Jone in Thailand) given three times per day in 12 people with mild to moderate COVID-19 symptoms [44-46]. COVID-19 symptoms, especially cough, improved within a few days after patients started taking the lower dose (60 mg) of andrographis, and all patients recovered after 3 weeks [47]. No information was provided on the effects of the 100-mg andrographis dose.

On the basis of these findings, a larger placebo-controlled trial was conducted among 60 participants, and Thailand’s health ministry subsequently approved a pilot program to use Fah Talai Jone for individuals age 18 to 60 years with minor symptoms within 72 hours of a COVID-19 diagnosis [44,48]. Andrographis is commonly used in Thailand in patients with mild COVID-19 [49]. A retrospective study of 605 hospitalized patients (mostly unvaccinated) with mild COVID-19 who took andrographis extract (total daily dose of 180 mg andrographolide) or received only standard of care for 5 days found that the use of andrographis was not significantly associated with risk of pneumonia due to COVID-19 [49]. In a clinical trial in Thailand, 146 patients with mild to moderate COVID-19 were randomized to receive either andrographis extract (180 mg/day andrographolide) for 5 days or placebo [50]. Both groups also received the antiviral medication favipiravir as part of standard treatment. The study evaluated whether the use of andrographis could prevent progression to severe COVID-19, but there was no significant difference between the groups in the proportion of patients who progressed to severe disease by day 4 (1.37% in the andrographis group vs. 2.74% in the placebo group). However, the researchers reported a significant decrease in levels of the inflammatory cytokine interleukin-1 beta between days 0 and 5 among patients who received andrographis.

A clinical trial in Tbilisi, Georgia, randomized 86 hospitalized patients with mild to moderate COVID-19 (mean age 45–50 years, vaccination status not specified) into two groups [51]. Thirty-four patients took 6 capsules daily of a product called Kan Jang/Nergecov (containing andrographis and Eleutherococcus senticosus for a total daily dose of 90 mg andrographolides), and 52 patients took a placebo for 14 days. Of the 71 patients who completed the study, 10% of those who took Kan Jang/Nergecov progressed to severe disease compared with 24% who took placebo. Kan Jang/Nergecov also appeared to reduce the severity of sore throat, muscle pain, and nasal discharge but not the severity of cough or fever. In addition, the use of Kan Jang/Nergecov did not reduce the duration of hospitalization or the time to viral clearance.
Safety

The safety of andrographis has not been well studied, but no safety concerns have been reported when typical doses of the herb (340–1,200 mg/day) have been used for several days or weeks [33,34,52]. Clinical trials have found minor adverse effects, including nausea, vomiting, vertigo, skin rashes, diarrhea, and fatigue [32,34,40]. Allergic reactions might also occur [34,39]. Findings from some animal studies suggest that andrographis might adversely affect fertility, so experts recommend against using this supplement during pregnancy and the preconception period [31,33,34].

According to animal and laboratory studies, andrographis might decrease blood pressure and inhibit platelet aggregation, so it could interact with antihypertensive and anticoagulant medications by enhancing their effects [52-54]. Because of its potential immune-stimulating effects, andrographis might also reduce the effectiveness of immunosuppressants [35,52]. Whether the potential immunostimulatory effect of andrographis might worsen the cytokine storm associated with COVID-19 is not known [39].
Echinacea

Echinacea, commonly known as purple coneflower, is an herb that grows in North America and Europe [55]. Although the genus Echinacea has many species, extracts of E. purpurea, E. angustifolia, and E. pallida are the most frequently used in dietary supplements. The echinacea supplements on the market in the United States often contain extracts from multiple species and plant parts [28].

Echinacea contains volatile terpenes, polysaccharides, polyacetylenes, alkamides, phenolic compounds, caffeic acid esters, and glycoproteins [28,55,56]. However, echinacea’s purported active constituents are not well defined [56], and the chemical composition of various echinacea species differs [28].

Echinacea might have antioxidant and antibacterial activities, stimulate monocytes and natural killer cells, and inhibit viruses from binding to host cells [15,55]. It might also reduce inflammation by inhibiting the inflammatory cytokines interleukin-6, interleukin-8, and tumor necrosis factor and increasing levels of the anti-inflammatory cytokine interleukin-10 [15,57]. Most studies of echinacea have assessed whether it helps prevent and treat the common cold and other upper respiratory illnesses, but it has also been used in traditional medicine to promote wound healing [55,56].
Efficacy

Several studies suggest that echinacea offers limited benefits for preventing the common cold [58,59], so some research has examined whether echinacea might have similar effects on COVID-19.

A preliminary in vitro study found that Echinaforce, an E. purpurea preparation, inactivated SARS-CoV-2 [60]. However, the results from the few clinical trials that have examined whether echinacea reduces the risk of SARS-CoV-2 infection or the severity of disease have been mixed. A clinical trial in Iran enrolled 100 nonhospitalized adults (mean age 45–47 years) who were suspected to have COVID-19 based on chest computed tomography (CT) scans or x-rays and clinical symptoms [61]. This study was conducted before COVID-19 vaccines were available. Patients received either echinacea (species and dose not specified) plus ginger (Zingiber officinale, dose not specified) and hydroxychloroquine for 7 days or hydroxychloroquine alone. Coughing, muscle pain, and shortness of breath were alleviated in 91% to 98% of individuals who took the combination of echinacea, ginger, and hydroxychloroquine, whereas only 69% to 79% of individuals who took hydroxychloroquine alone experienced these benefits. However, the combination treatment did not reduce the severity of fever or sore throat or the rate of hospitalization for COVID-19.

Another clinical trial in Bulgaria included 120 healthy participants age 18 to 75 years [62]. Half of the participants took 2,400 mg Echinaforce daily over three periods of 2 months, 2 months, and 1 month, with washouts of 1 week between each period; the other half served as a control group (there was no placebo). None of the participants were vaccinated against COVID-19 at the start of the trial. Several became partially or fully vaccinated during the trial, but there was no significant difference in vaccination rates between groups. Participants were followed to determine if they tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 infection or developed another acute respiratory tract infection. During the trial, participants in the echinacea group who had COVID-19 or another respiratory tract infection were treated with a total of 4,000 mg/day Echinaforce for up to 10 days; all participants also received concomitant treatments. Participants who took Echinaforce were less likely to test positive for SARS-CoV-2 infection than those in the control group, but there were no differences between groups in the number of symptomatic episodes of COVID-19. In addition, treatment with Echinaforce reduced SARS-CoV-2 viral load but did not affect the number of days it took to achieve SARS-CoV-2 viral clearance.

Because echinacea might have immunostimulatory effects, some investigators have suggested that it might worsen the cytokine storm that can develop in patients with COVID-19 [63]. However, limited evidence from clinical trials suggests that the use of echinacea decreases—not increases—levels of proinflammatory cytokines [63].
Safety

Echinacea appears to be safe, and only a few adverse effects have been reported. The most common adverse effects are sleeplessness, skin rashes, and gastrointestinal upset (e.g., diarrhea) [56,64,65]. Isolated reports of elevated liver enzymes and liver injury have been associated with its use, but these events could have been caused by a contaminant or the product’s preparation. In rare cases, echinacea can cause allergic reactions [56].

The safety of using echinacea during pregnancy is not known, so experts recommend against the use of echinacea supplements by pregnant women [66]. Echinacea might interact with several medications. For example, echinacea might increase cytochrome P450 activity, thereby reducing levels of some drugs metabolized by these enzymes [67]. In addition, echinacea might reduce the effectiveness of immunosuppressants due to its potential immunostimulatory activity [68].
Elderberry (European Elder)

Elder berry (usually written elderberry) is the fruit of a small deciduous tree, Sambucus nigra (also known as European elder or black elder), that grows in North America, Europe, and parts of Africa and Asia [69,70]. Elderberry contains many compounds—including anthocyanins, flavonols, and phenolic acids—that might have antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, antiviral, antimicrobial, and immune-stimulating effects [15,70-74]. Studies of the effects of elderberry have primarily used elderberry extracts, not the berries themselves [70].
Efficacy

Sales of elderberry supplements more than doubled shortly after the COVID-19 pandemic began in the United States [75]. Some research has evaluated whether elderberry could benefit people with COVID-19, but no clinical trials have been completed. The interest in elderberry was based on preliminary laboratory and animal research suggesting that constituents of elderberry might help prevent upper respiratory tract infections by inhibiting viruses from binding to host cells and by stimulating the immune system [70]. Elderberry’s effects on the common cold and influenza have been examined in a few small clinical trials, with promising results [71]. A 2021 systematic review of five clinical trials of elderberry to prevent or treat viral respiratory illnesses found beneficial effects on some outcomes [76]. The authors found that elderberry supplementation for 2 to 16 days might reduce the severity and duration of the common cold and the duration of flu but does not appear to reduce the risk of the common cold. However, the authors noted that the evidence is uncertain because the studies were small, heterogeneous, and of poor quality.
Safety

Elderberry flowers and ripe fruit appear to be safe for consumption. However, the bark, leaves, seeds, and raw or unripe fruit of S. nigra contain a cyanogenic glycoside that is potentially toxic and can cause nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, dehydration due to diuresis, and cyanide poisoning [70,75,77]. The heat from cooking destroys this toxin, so cooked elderberry fruit and properly processed commercial products do not pose this safety concern [15,70,72,75,77]. Elderberry might affect insulin and glucose metabolism, so according to experts, people with diabetes should use it with caution [75]. The safety of elderberry during pregnancy is not known, so experts recommend against the use of elderberry supplements by pregnant women [66,70].

Recent analyses suggest that some elderberry supplements have been adulterated because they are highly diluted or contain a cheaper ingredient, such as black rice extract, instead of elderberry [69].

Due to its potential immunostimulatory activity, elderberry might reduce the effectiveness of immunosuppressant medications [78].
Ginseng

Ginseng is the common name of several species of the genus Panax, most commonly P. ginseng (also called Asian ginseng or Korean ginseng) and P. quinquefolius (American ginseng) [79,80]. Asian ginseng grows mainly in China and Korea, whereas American ginseng grows in the United States and Canada [79].

Triterpene glycosides, also known as ginsenosides, are some of the main purported active constituents of ginseng [79,81]. Although ginseng contains numerous ginsenosides, research has focused on the Rb1 ginsenoside and compound K, a bioactive substance formed when the intestinal microbiota metabolize ginsenosides [79,81]. Both the product’s preparation method and variations in people’s intestinal microbiota can affect the type and quantity of ginseng’s bioactive compounds in the body [81].

Animal and laboratory studies suggest that ginseng stimulates B-cell proliferation and increases the production of some interleukins and interferon-gamma [79]; these cytokines affect immune activation and modulation [13]. Ginseng might also inhibit virus replication and have anti-inflammatory activity. However, whether ginseng has a clinically meaningful effect on immune function in humans is not clear [79,82].

Another botanical, eleuthero (Eleutherococus senticosus), is sometimes confused with true ginseng. Eleuthero used to be called Siberian ginseng, but it comes from the Eleutherococcus genus of plants, not the Panax genus, and it does not contain ginsenosides [79].
Efficacy

Several clinical trials have examined whether ginseng helps prevent upper respiratory tract infections, such as the common cold and flu, but results have been mixed and none of the trials addressed COVID-19 [81,83].
Safety

Ginseng appears to be safe. Most of its adverse effects, including headache, sleep difficulty, and gastrointestinal symptoms, are minor [81-83]. However, doses of more than 2.5 g/day might cause insomnia, tachyarrhythmias, hypertension, and nervousness [79,81].

A few case reports of vaginal bleeding and mastalgia (breast pain) in the 1970s and 1980s from the use of ginseng preparations raised concerns about the safety of ginseng. As a result, some scientists concluded that ginseng has estrogenic effects [84-87]. However, one of these case reports involved use of Rumanian ginseng [86], and whether this was true ginseng is not clear. In addition, eleuthero was often referred to, incorrectly, as ginseng at that time because it was called Siberian ginseng. So, it is unclear whether these case reports reflected the effects of true ginseng. Nevertheless, some experts caution that ginseng might not be safe for use during pregnancy [81,88,89].

Ginseng might interact with many medications. For example, it might increase the risk of hypoglycemia if taken with antidiabetes medications, increase the risk of adverse effects if taken with stimulants, and reduce the effectiveness of immunosuppressants [89,90].
Magnesium

Magnesium is an essential mineral that is present in many foods, including green leafy vegetables, nuts, seeds, and whole grains. The Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA, average daily level of intake sufficient to meet the nutrient requirements of 97% to 98% of healthy individuals) ranges from 30 to 410 mg for infants and children, depending on age, and from 310 to 420 mg for adults [91].

Magnesium is a cofactor for more than 600 enzymatic reactions, and it plays a role in blood pressure regulation, normal heart rhythm, and innate and adaptive immunity [14,25,92-94]. Magnesium also has antithrombotic and bronchodilation effects and is required for the activation of vitamin D [92,94-98]. Because of these effects, magnesium supplementation may be beneficial for people with some respiratory disorders, such as asthma and pneumonia [99,100].

Healthy people do not routinely develop overt signs of magnesium deficiency, but many people do not consume the recommended amounts of magnesium [25,101]. Low magnesium status is associated with decreased immune cell activity; increased oxidative stress; and increased inflammation, including increased levels of some inflammatory cytokines, such as interleukin-6 [92,95,102-105]. Low magnesium intakes or status are also associated with hypertension, impaired pulmonary function, cardiovascular disease, type 2 diabetes, and obesity [25,98,106]. These conditions are associated with poorer COVID-19 outcomes.
Efficacy

Because of magnesium’s effects on immunity, inflammation, and the cardiovascular system, some scientists have investigated whether magnesium supplementation affects the risk of COVID-19 or the severity of its symptoms.

A few studies have found that people who have COVID-19 develop dysmagnesemia (abnormally low or high blood levels of magnesium) [107-109]. For example, in an analysis of serum magnesium levels in 300 patients (mean age 66.7 years) who were admitted to the hospital with COVID-19 in France, 48% had abnormally low magnesium levels (<0.75 mmol/L) and 9.6% had abnormally high magnesium levels (≥0.95 mmol/L) [109]. In addition, an observational study in Iran among 459 patients (mean age 61.8 years) with COVID-19 found that those who died from the disease had lower magnesium levels than those who survived, although the mean magnesium levels for both groups were within the normal range [107]. However, hypomagnesemia is common in critically ill patients, regardless of their COVID-19 status [98]. Furthermore, renal failure, other health conditions, and the use of certain medications, which might apply to many people with COVID-19, can also cause both hypomagnesemia and hypermagnesemia [110]. Finally, serum magnesium levels might not reflect total body magnesium stores, and hypoalbuminemia might cause spuriously low magnesium levels because about 25% of magnesium is bound to albumin [25,111]. Therefore, the presence of dysmagnesemia among patients with COVID-19 does not necessarily mean that magnesium intakes affect the risk of the disease or its severity. In addition, like other critical illnesses, COVID-19 might cause dysmagnesemia.

A few observational studies have examined the effects of magnesium supplementation in patients with COVID-19. For example, a retrospective study in Singapore enrolled 43 hospitalized patients age 50 years or older with COVID-19 [97]. Patients who received daily supplementation with 150 mg magnesium, 1,000 international units (IU) (25 mcg) vitamin D3, and 500 mcg vitamin B12 for a median of 5 days were less likely to need oxygen therapy, intensive care support, or both than those who did not receive the supplementation.

Another small study in Serbia in five hospitalized patients (mean age 39.6 years) with COVID-19, difficulty breathing, and oxygen saturation at or below 95% found that taking a supplement that provided 200 mg magnesium, 1,200 mg potassium, 50 mg zinc, and 1,000 mg citric acid every 4 hours for 48 hours increased oxygen saturation by a mean of 3.6 points [112]. However, in studies that use combination treatments, the potential contribution of one component is impossible to determine.

A clinical trial in Iran randomized 64 hospitalized adults (mean age 48 years) with moderate COVID-19 to receive either 300 mg magnesium daily or placebo from hospital admission to discharge [113]. Fewer people in the magnesium group required oxygen therapy than in the placebo group (9 patients vs. 14 patients). Magnesium supplementation also significantly improved oxygen saturation in arterial blood. However, patients who received magnesium did not have a shorter average hospital stay than those who received placebo (mean of 7.32 days vs. 7.28 days), and the study found no differences between the two groups in respiratory rate or fever.
Safety

Magnesium in foods is considered safe at any intake. Magnesium from dietary supplements or medications that contain magnesium, such as some laxatives, is safe at intakes up to 65 to 350 mg/day for children, depending on age, and up to 350 mg/day for adults [91]. These upper limits, however, do not apply to individuals receiving magnesium treatment under the care of a physician. Intakes that are higher than the upper limits can cause diarrhea, nausea, and abdominal cramping. Magnesium toxicity, which usually develops after serum concentrations exceed 1.74 to 2.61 mmol/L, can cause hypotension, nausea, vomiting, facial flushing, urine retention, ileus, depression, and lethargy, and patients can ultimately develop muscle weakness, difficulty breathing, extreme hypotension, irregular heartbeat, and cardiac arrest or even die.

Magnesium supplementation can interact with several medications. For example, it can decrease the absorption of bisphosphonates and form insoluble complexes with antibiotics. In addition, the use of loop diuretics, thiazide diuretics, or proton pump inhibitors can deplete magnesium levels [114-117].

More information on magnesium is available in the Office of Dietary Supplements (ODS) health professional fact sheet on magnesium.
Melatonin

Melatonin is a hormone produced by the pineal gland in the brain, mainly during the night, that helps regulate circadian rhythms [118,119]. Its levels decrease with age [119]. Most melatonin supplementation studies have evaluated its ability to control sleep and wake cycles, promote sleep, and reduce jet lag [119]. Studies have also examined the use of melatonin supplements for reducing blood pressure [120].

Laboratory and animal studies suggest that melatonin enhances immune response by increasing the proliferation and maturation of natural killer cells, T and B cells, granulocytes, and monocytes [36,121,122]. Melatonin also appears to have anti-inflammatory and antioxidant effects [36,118,119,121-123]. However, whether these properties have a clinically significant effect on immunity in humans is not clear. Melatonin supplementation also appears to improve some markers of oxidative stress and cardio-metabolic risk in individuals with type 2 diabetes and coronary heart disease [124].
Efficacy

Some studies have evaluated the use of melatonin in people with COVID-19 because of its reported anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, and immune-enhancing properties.

One study found that among 26,779 people tested for COVID-19, those who reported using melatonin supplements were less likely to have the disease [125]. However, this study did not report the dose or duration of melatonin supplement use. A small clinical trial in Mexico examined the effects of 50 mg melatonin every 12 hours for 5 days plus the drug pentoxifylline in 22 hospitalized adults (mean age 57.9 years) with pneumonia that resulted from COVID-19 [126]. Another group of 22 patients received pentoxifylline alone. Patients who received melatonin and pentoxifylline had a significantly lower lipid peroxidation index (a measure of oxidative stress) than at baseline, whereas those who received pentoxifylline alone did not. Both treatments significantly increased nitrite levels from baseline values (suggesting higher oxygen levels) and reduced levels of the inflammatory marker C-reactive protein. Neither treatment affected total antioxidant capacity or levels of the inflammatory markers interleukin-6 and procalcitonin.

A few clinical trials have evaluated the use of melatonin as an adjuvant therapy in patients with COVID-19, although none of these were placebo-controlled trials [127-131]. One prospective trial in Iraq randomized 158 patients (mean age 56 years) with severe COVID-19 to receive 10 mg/day melatonin plus standard of care for 14 days or standard of care alone [127]. Patients who received melatonin were less likely to develop thrombosis or sepsis by day 17 than patients who received only standard of care, and a smaller percentage of patients died in the melatonin group (1.2%) than in the standard of care group (17.1%). A study in Iran evaluated the effects of administering 9 mg/day melatonin for 14 days on clinical symptoms in patients (mean age 51–53 years) with mild to moderate COVID-19 [129]. Twenty-four patients were randomized to receive melatonin plus standard of care, while the 20 patients in the control group received standard of care alone. After treatment, the percentage of patients with fatigue, cough, and dyspnea was lower in the melatonin group than in the control group, although there was no difference between the groups in the occurrence of other clinical symptoms. The mean time to hospital discharge was also shorter among patients who received melatonin. No patients died in either group, and no adverse events were reported.
Safety

Typical doses of 1 to 10 mg/day melatonin appear to be safe for short-term use [36,132]. Reported side effects, which are usually minor, include dizziness, headache, nausea, upset stomach, rash, and sleepiness [119,132]. However, some reports have linked high blood levels of melatonin with delayed puberty and hypogonadism [119].

Studies have not evaluated melatonin supplementation during pregnancy and breastfeeding, but some research suggests that these supplements might inhibit ovarian function [133]. Therefore, some experts recommend that women who are pregnant or breastfeeding avoid taking melatonin [132].

Melatonin might interact with several medications. For example, melatonin might have anticoagulant effects, so it might increase the risk of bleeding if used with anticoagulants. It also might reduce the effects of both anticonvulsants and immunosuppressants [134-136].
N-acetylcysteine

N-acetylcysteine (NAC) is a derivative of the amino acid cysteine. It is an antioxidant that increases glutathione levels in the body [137,138]. NAC has mucolytic activity, so it helps reduce respiratory mucus levels [137,139]. Laboratory research suggests that NAC might affect immune system function and suppress viral replication [139]. NAC also decreases levels of interleukin-6 and has other anti-inflammatory effects [137,138].

Much of the research on NAC has used an inhaled, liquid form of this compound. This form—which is classified as a drug, not a dietary supplement—is approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for use as a mucolytic agent and for decreasing respiratory secretion viscosity [140]. Oral products that contain NAC are also sold as dietary supplements[141].
Efficacy

Some studies have evaluated the use of oral NAC to treat bronchopulmonary diseases, such as bronchitis and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) with some promising results [142,143]. Because of these findings and its effects in the body, researchers have examined the use of NAC in patients with COVID-19. In a retrospective study in Greece of 82 patients (mean age 61–64 years) who were hospitalized with moderate or severe COVID-19 pneumonia, 600 mg NAC twice daily for 14 days in addition to standard of care reduced the risk of progression to severe respiratory failure with the need for mechanical ventilation [144]. NAC also reduced 14- and 28-day mortality rates; at 14 days, 10 of 40 patients in the control group and 0 of 42 in the NAC group had died, and 12 of the patients in the control group and two in the NAC group had died at 28 days.

A small clinical trial in Mexico examined the effects of 600 mg NAC every 12 hours for 5 days plus the drug pentoxifylline in 22 hospitalized adults (mean age 57.9 years) with pneumonia that resulted from COVID-19 [126]. Another group of 22 patients received pentoxifylline alone. Patients who received NAC and pentoxifylline had a significantly lower lipid peroxidation index as well as lower levels of the inflammatory markers interleukin-6 and procalcitonin than at baseline, whereas those who received pentoxifylline alone did not. NAC plus pentoxifylline also significantly increased total antioxidant capacity, whereas pentoxifylline alone did not. Both treatments significantly reduced levels of the inflammatory marker C-reactive protein and increased plasma nitrite levels (suggesting higher oxygen levels).

A clinical trial in Iran randomized 225 people (mean age 47–54 years) with COVID-19 who were not hospitalized into three groups of 75 patients [145]. None of the participants were vaccinated against COVID-19. One group received 600 mg NAC twice daily for 5 days in addition to standard of care, the second group received the mucolytic medication bromhexine and standard of care, and the third group received standard of care only. Fewer patients in the NAC group (11 patients) required hospitalization than in the standard of care group (21 patients). The study also reported shorter average hospital stays for patients in the NAC group, and while there were seven deaths in the standard of care group, no patients in the NAC group died.

A clinical trial in Brazil examined the effects of intravenous NAC (which is classified as a drug) in 135 hospitalized patients (median age 58–59 years) with confirmed or suspected COVID-19 [146]. Patients received either 21 g NAC, administered intravenously over 20 hours, or placebo, in addition to standard of care. NAC had no effect on the need for or duration of mechanical ventilation or admission to the intensive care unit (ICU), time in the ICU, or mortality. Another trial in Iran evaluated the use of intravenous NAC in 92 patients (mean age 56–59 years) with mild to moderate acute respiratory distress syndrome caused by COVID-19 [147]. Patients in this study received an intravenous infusion of 40 mg/kg/day NAC for 3 days or placebo. The use of NAC did not affect the 28-day mortality rate. The study also reported no differences between the groups in other clinical outcomes, such as the proportion of patients who required mechanical ventilation, the mean number of ventilator-free days, or the median length of hospital stay.
Safety

As an FDA-approved drug, the safety profile of NAC has been evaluated [140]. Reported side effects of oral NAC include nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, diarrhea, indigestion, and epigastric discomfort [143]. No safety concerns have been reported for products labeled as dietary supplements that contain NAC.

NAC might have anticoagulant effects and might reduce blood pressure, so it could have additive effects if taken with anticoagulants and antihypertensive medications [148]. The combination of NAC and nitroglycerine (a medication used to treat angina) can cause hypotension and severe headaches [149,150].
Omega-3 fatty acids

Omega-3 fatty acids (omega-3s) are polyunsaturated fatty acids that are present in certain foods, such as flaxseed and fatty fish, as well as in dietary supplements, such as those containing fish oil. Most scientific research focuses on the long-chain omega-3s eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA). The main food sources of EPA and DHA are fatty fish and fish oil.

The Food and Nutrition Board (FNB) of the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine established an Adequate Intake (AI; the intake that is assumed to ensure nutritional adequacy) for omega-3s that ranges from 0.5 to 1.6 g/day for infants and children, depending on age, and from 1.1 to 1.6 g/day for adults [151]. The FNB has not established intake recommendations for EPA and DHA specifically because they are not essential nutrients; only the omega-3 fatty acid alpha linolenic acid (ALA), which our bodies cannot synthesize, is essential. Our bodies can then convert ALA into EPA and DHA.

Omega-3s play important roles as components of the phospholipids that form the structures of cell membranes [151]. Omega-3s also form eicosanoids; these signaling molecules affect the body’s cardiovascular, pulmonary, immune, and endocrine systems [151,152]. Omega-6 fatty acids, the other major class of polyunsaturated fatty acids, also form eicosanoids, and these eicosanoids are generally more potent mediators of inflammation, vasoconstriction, and platelet aggregation than those made from omega-3s. Thus, higher concentrations of omega-3s than of omega-6s tip the eicosanoid balance toward less inflammatory activity [153,154].

Higher intakes and blood levels of EPA and DHA are associated with lower levels of inflammatory cytokines [153,155]. Omega-3s might also affect immune function by upregulating the activity of macrophages, neutrophils, T cells, B cells, natural killer cells, and other immune cells.

A deficiency of omega-3s can cause rough, scaly skin and dermatitis [151]. Almost everyone in the United States obtains sufficient amounts of omega-3s to avoid a deficiency, but many people might benefit from higher intakes of EPA and DHA, particularly to maintain or improve cardiovascular health [156].
Efficacy

Whether higher intakes or blood levels of omega-3s reduce the risk or severity of COVID-19 is not known. However, self-reported use of omega-3 supplements (dose not reported) more than three times per week for at least 3 months among 372,720 U.K. residents age 16 to 90 years was associated with a 12% lower risk of SARS-CoV-2 infection after adjusting for potential confounders [157]. Findings were similar for 45,757 individuals in the United States and for 27,373 participants in Sweden [157].

Because of these findings and the potential anti-inflammatory and immune-stimulating effects of omega-3s, several studies have investigated the use of omega-3s in patients with COVID-19. An analysis of red blood cell levels of EPA plus DHA among 100 hospitalized patients (mean age 72.5 years) with COVID-19 did not find a difference in the risk of death among quartiles of EPA plus DHA levels [155]. However, a study that analyzed data from 110,584 individuals (mean age 68 years) in the U.K. Biobank database reported that people with the highest levels of plasma DHA had a 21% lower risk of testing positive for SARS-CoV-2 and a 26% lower risk of being hospitalized for COVID-19 than those with the lowest levels [158]. No associations were found between plasma DHA levels and the risk of death from COVID-19.

In a clinical trial in Iran, 42 of 128 critically ill patients (mean age 64–66 years) with COVID-19 received a 1,000 mg omega-3 supplement containing 400 mg EPA and 200 mg DHA for 14 days [159]. Patients who received the supplement had a significantly higher 1-month survival rate compared with those who were not supplemented. The omega-3 supplement also improved several measures of respiratory and renal function, including arterial pH, blood urea nitrogen, and creatinine levels, but it did not affect other measures, including oxygen saturation and white blood cell count. A study in Norway investigated whether taking a daily supplement of 5 mL of cod liver oil could reduce the incidence of SARS-CoV-2 infection or serious COVID-19 [160]. This dose of cod liver oil contained 1.2 g of long-chain omega-3s, including 400 mg EPA and 500 mg DHA; 10 mcg (400 IU) vitamin D3; 250 mcg vitamin A; and 3 mg vitamin E. The study randomized 34,601 adults (mean age 44.9 years) without COVID-19 to receive either cod liver oil or a corn oil placebo for up to 6 months. Among the full study population, the incidence of SARS-CoV-2 infection was only 1.32%, and cod liver oil supplementation did not appear to provide a benefit; there was no difference between the two groups in the incidence of SARS-CoV-2 infection or the number of cases of serious COVID-19.
Safety

The FNB did not establish a Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL; the maximum daily intake that is unlikely to cause adverse health effects) for omega-3s, although it noted that high doses of DHA and/or EPA (900 mg/day EPA plus 600 mg/day DHA or more for several weeks) might reduce immune function by suppressing inflammatory responses [151].

Doses of 2 to 15 g/day EPA and/or DHA might also increase bleeding time by reducing platelet aggregation [151]. However, according to the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA), long-term consumption of EPA and DHA supplements at combined doses of up to about 5 g/day appears to be safe for adults [161]. EFSA noted that these doses have not been shown to cause bleeding problems or affect immune function, glucose homeostasis, or lipid peroxidation. Similarly, FDA has concluded that dietary supplements providing no more than 5 g/day EPA and DHA are safe when used as recommended [162].

Commonly reported side effects of omega-3 supplements—including unpleasant taste, bad breath, heartburn, nausea, gastrointestinal discomfort, diarrhea, headache, and odoriferous sweat—are usually mild [163,164]. Because of their antiplatelet effects at high doses, omega-3s might interact with anticoagulants [165]. However, according to the FDA-approved package inserts for omega-3 pharmaceutical preparations, studies with omega-3s have not found that these medications result in “clinically significant bleeding episodes” [166]. Omega-3s might also interact with other medications. For example, omega-3s might reduce blood pressure, so they could increase the risk of hypotension if taken with antihypertensive agents [167,168].

More information on omega-3s is available in the ODS health professional fact sheet on omega-3s.
Probiotics

Probiotics are live microorganisms that confer a health benefit when administered in adequate amounts [169]. They include certain bacteria (e.g., Lactobacillus acidophilus, L. rhamnosus [LGG], and Bifidobacterium longum) and yeasts (e.g., Saccharomyces boulardii). Probiotics are naturally present in some fermented foods, added to some food products, and available as dietary supplements.

Probiotics are identified by their strain, which includes the genus, species, subspecies (if applicable), and an alphanumeric strain designation [170]. Their amounts are measured in colony-forming units (CFUs), which indicate the number of viable cells. Common amounts used are 1 x 109 (1 billion CFU; commonly designated as 109 CFU) and 1 x 1010 (10 billion CFU or 1010 CFU).

Probiotics act mainly in the gastrointestinal tract [17]. They might reduce inflammation and improve immune function in several ways, including enhancing gut barrier function, increasing immunoglobulin production, inhibiting viral replication, and enhancing the phagocytic activity of white blood cells [17,171-174]. However, the mechanisms of their potential effects on immune function are unclear. In addition, research findings for one probiotic strain cannot be extrapolated to others [17,175].
Efficacy

Several systematic reviews and meta-analyses published before the emergence of COVID-19 evaluated the use of probiotics to prevent or treat respiratory tract infections in children and adults. All of these studies found that probiotics have beneficial effects on some, but not all, outcomes [174,176-179]. In addition, self-reported use of probiotic supplements more than three times per week for at least 3 months among 372,720 U.K. residents age 16 to 90 years was associated with a 14% lower risk of SARS-CoV-2 infection after adjusting for potential confounders [157]. Findings were similar for 45,757 individuals in the United States and for 27,373 participants in Sweden [157].

A trial in the United States evaluated whether LGG could reduce the risk of COVID-19 in people who had been exposed to COVID-19 through a household contact within the past 7 days [180]. The study randomized 182 participants to take 20 billion CFU of LGG once daily (children under 5 years took 10 billion CFU) or placebo for 28 days. There was no difference between the groups in the incidence of COVID-19 diagnoses. However, only 26% of participants who received LGG reported illness symptoms by day 28 compared with 43% of participants who received placebo. In addition, the participants in the LGG group who did experience symptoms had a longer time to symptom onset.

Some studies have examined whether probiotics could be useful adjuvant therapies for people with COVID-19. For example, this possibility was examined in a clinical trial in Italy among 70 patients (median age 59 years) who were hospitalized with COVID-19 [181]. All patients received hydroxychloroquine, antibiotics, and tocilizumab (a monoclonal antibody), alone or in combination. In addition, 28 of the 70 patients also took a probiotic mixture (Sivomixx) that contained Streptococcus, Lactobacillus, and Bifidobacterium strains three times daily for a total daily dose of 2,400 billion bacteria for 14 days. Signs and symptoms—including diarrhea, fever, asthenia (weakness), headaches, myalgia (muscle pain), and dyspnea (difficulty breathing)—were significantly lower within 7 days in patients who took the probiotics than in those who did not. Probiotic administration also reduced the risk of mortality, transfer to ICU, and respiratory failure.

In a clinical trial in Mexico, adults (median age 34–39 years) with COVID-19 were randomized to take one probiotic capsule or placebo per day [182]. The probiotic capsule contained the Lactiplantibacillus plantarum strains KABP022, KABP023, and KABP033 and the Pediococcus acidilactici strain KABP021 for a total daily dose of at least 2 x 109 CFU. Of the 300 patients randomized to receive either probiotics or placebo, 78 (53%) in the probiotics group achieved complete symptomatic remission and viral clearance by day 30 compared with 41 patients (28%) in the placebo group. Patients who received probiotics also had lower nasopharyngeal viral loads on days 15 and 30. Among the 116 patients who had evidence of lung infiltrates at baseline, those in the probiotics group showed a significant reduction in the severity of their lung infiltrates at days 15 and 30.

A systematic review and meta-analysis evaluated the results of eight randomized controlled trials (including all the clinical trials discussed above), which included a total of 1,027 participants [183]. The authors found with moderate certainty of evidence that the use of probiotics in patients with COVID-19 reduces the incidence of certain COVID-19 symptoms, such as diarrhea and cough, compared with placebo. However, the analysis found no reduction of mortality in people who received probiotics based on low certainty of evidence.
Safety

Probiotics, such as strains of Lactobacillus, Bifidobacterium, and Propionibacterium, have a long history of use in food and are often present in the normal gastrointestinal microbiota, indicating that probiotic supplements are safe for most people [173]. Side effects, which are usually minor, include gastrointestinal symptoms, such as gas [17,174]. However, potential safety concerns can include systemic infections, especially in individuals who are immunocompromised [173]. For example, in a few cases (mainly in individuals who were severely ill or immunocompromised), the use of probiotics was linked to bacteremia, fungemia (fungi in the blood), or infections that resulted in severe illness [184,185].

Probiotics are not known to interact with medications. However, antibiotic and antifungal medications might decrease the effectiveness of some probiotics [186,187].

More information on probiotics is available in the ODS health professional fact sheet on probiotics.
Quercetin

Quercetin is a flavonol (a polyphenolic compound) that is present in many fruits, vegetables, spices, and beverages, including citrus fruits, apples, onions, berries, broccoli, cilantro, dill, tea, and red wine [188-192]. Research suggests that quercetin might have antioxidant, antiviral, anti-inflammatory, and immunomodulatory effects [189-195]. It might also inhibit platelet aggregation [189,195]. Quercetin has very low oral bioavailability, ranging from 3% to 17% [190], but combining it with sunflower lecithin increases its bioavailability by as much as 20 times [189,191].
Efficacy

Results have been mixed in the few clinical trials that have examined the effects of 500 and 1,000 mg/day quercetin (sometimes in combination with vitamin C or niacin) on the risk of upper respiratory tract infections and the severity of the symptoms of these infections [196,197]. However, data are very limited on the use of quercetin supplementation in patients with COVID-19.

One open-label clinical trial in Pakistan evaluated the effects of quercetin on viral clearance and symptom resolution in outpatients with mild to moderate COVID-19 [198]. In the trial, 108 patients who were not vaccinated against COVID-19 were randomized to receive quercetin plus standard of care (mean age 41 years) or standard of care alone (mean age 54 years). The quercetin group received 200 mg quercetin with sunflower lecithin three times a day during the first week of the study and 200 mg twice daily during the second week. By the end of the first week, 34 patients (68%) in the quercetin group tested negative for SARS-CoV-2 compared with only 12 patients (24%) in the standard of care only group, and COVID-19 symptoms had resolved in 26 patients (52%) in the quercetin group and in 12 patients (24%) in the standard of care only group. By week 2, nearly all the patients in both groups tested negative for SARS-CoV-2 infection, and most patients no longer had COVID-19 symptoms. A confounding factor in this study was that patients in the standard of care only group were significantly older than those in the quercetin group.
Safety

According to FDA, up to 500 mg quercetin per serving is generally recognized as safe (GRAS) as an ingredient in foods and beverages, including grain products, pastas, processed fruits, fruit juices, and soft candies [199]. Less is known about quercetin supplements, but no serious adverse effects have been reported in clinical trials that used up to 1,000 mg/day for up to 12 weeks [188,196,200].

Quercetin might affect drug-metabolizing enzymes, such as CYP3A4, which could increase the bioavailability of cyclosporine, pravastatin (used to treat high cholesterol), and fexofenadine (an antihistamine) [200]. In addition, quercetin might reduce blood pressure in people with hypertension [201], so it could potentiate the effects of antihypertensive medications.
Selenium

Selenium is an essential mineral found in many foods, including Brazil nuts, seafood, meat, poultry, eggs, and dairy products. It is also found in bread, cereals, and other grain products. The RDA for selenium ranges from 15 to 70 mcg for infants and children, depending on age, and from 55 to 70 mcg for adults [202].

Selenium helps support both the innate and adaptive immune systems and reduces the risk of infections [14,104,203-208]. As an antioxidant, selenium might help reduce the systemic inflammatory response that can lead to acute respiratory distress syndrome and organ failure [204,206,209].

Low selenium status in humans has been associated with lower natural killer cell activity, an increased risk of some bacterial infections, and the increased virulence of certain viruses [9,14,205,208-210]. In addition, some research suggests that taking 100 to 300 mcg/day selenium supplements improves immune function, and one study in the United Kingdom found that doses of 50 or 100 mcg/day enhanced the immune response to a poliovirus vaccine [205,211].

Selenium deficiency is very rare in the United States and Canada, but low selenium status is common in some areas of the world, such as parts of Europe and China [207,212].
Efficacy

Because selenium has been shown to have antiviral, anti-inflammatory, and immune-enhancing effects, researchers have investigated some potential associations between selenium status and COVID-19. However, no clinical trials have evaluated the use of selenium supplements in people with COVID-19.

Some research shows that patients who were hospitalized with COVID-19 had low selenium status at admission, and this low status might adversely affect the body’s immune response [9,213-215]. In addition, selenium deficiency might increase the risk of mortality from COVID-19 [208]. For example, in a small study in Germany, the mean serum selenium level of 33 patients with COVID-19 (5.1 mcg/dL) was significantly lower than the mean value from a healthy cross-sectional study of 1,915 European residents (8.4 mcg/dL) [214]. A value of 8.0 mcg/dL is typically considered adequate [216]. In addition, the 27 patients who survived COVID-19 had a significantly higher mean serum selenium level (5.3 mcg/dL) than the six who did not (4.1 mcg/dL) [214]. Similarly, a retrospective analysis in China of data from about 70,000 people with COVID-19 found significantly higher survival rates in those living in areas where the average selenium status was higher than in those living in areas where the average selenium status was lower, based on hair selenium levels in the various regions [212]. However, selenium status can be assessed in multiple ways, and because some selenium is bound to albumin in the blood [217] selenium measurements can be confounded if they are not adjusted for albumin levels in people with severe illness.
Safety

Up to 45 to 400 mcg/day selenium from foods and dietary supplements is safe for infants and children, depending on age, and up to 400 mcg/day is safe for adults [202]. These upper limits, however, do not apply to individuals receiving selenium under the care of a physician. Higher intakes can cause a garlic odor in the breath and a metallic taste in the mouth as well as hair and nail loss or brittleness. Other signs and symptoms of excess selenium intakes include nausea, diarrhea, skin rashes, fatigue, irritability, and nervous system abnormalities.

Cisplatin, a chemotherapy agent used to treat some cancers, can reduce selenium levels in hair, plasma, and serum [218,219].

More information on selenium is available in the ODS health professional fact sheet on selenium.
Vitamin C

Vitamin C, also called ascorbic acid, is an essential nutrient found in many fruits and vegetables, including citrus fruits, tomatoes, potatoes, red and green peppers, kiwifruit, broccoli, strawberries, brussels sprouts, and cantaloupe. The RDA ranges from 15 to 115 mg for infants and children, depending on age, and from 75 to 120 mg for nonsmoking adults; people who smoke need 35 mg more per day [202].

Vitamin C plays an important role in both innate and adaptive immunity, probably because of its antioxidant effects, antimicrobial and antiviral actions, and effects on immune system modulators [23,64,220-222]. Vitamin C helps maintain epithelial integrity, enhance the differentiation and proliferation of B cells and T cells, enhance phagocytosis, normalize cytokine production, and decrease histamine levels [221]. It might also inhibit viral replication [223].

Vitamin C deficiency impairs immune function and increases susceptibility to infections [221]. Some research suggests that supplemental vitamin C enhances immune function [9,224], but its effects might vary depending on an individual’s vitamin C status [225].

Vitamin C deficiency is uncommon in the United States, affecting only about 7% of individuals age 6 years and older [226]. People who smoke and those who eat a limited variety of foods (such as some older adults and people with alcohol or drug use disorders) are more likely than others to have insufficient vitamin C intakes [222,224].
Efficacy

Because vitamin C plays a role in the immune system, some scientists have investigated whether it might reduce the risk of COVID-19 or the severity of symptoms. Evidence from studies evaluating vitamin C supplementation for the common cold, pneumonia, and viral infections, including Epstein-Barr and herpes zoster, also spurred interest in vitamin C for COVID-19 [220,223,224,227].

A few observational studies have examined the effects of vitamin C supplementation on mortality rates in patients with COVID-19 and have had mixed findings [9,228]. For example, a retrospective chart review of 102 patients (median age 63 years) with COVID-19 who were receiving intensive care included 73 patients who received vitamin C plus zinc (doses not specified); the other patients did not receive these supplements [229]. Vitamin C and zinc supplementation did not affect mortality. Another retrospective chart review included 152 patients (median age 68 years) with COVID-19 who were on mechanical ventilation [230]. The 79 patients who received vitamin C supplements (doses not specified) had a significantly lower mortality rate than those who did not receive vitamin C supplements.

A small clinical trial in Mexico examined the effects of administering 1,000 mg vitamin C every 12 hours for 5 days plus the drug pentoxifylline to 22 hospitalized adults (mean age 57.9 years) with pneumonia that resulted from COVID-19 [126]. Patients who received vitamin C and pentoxifylline had significantly lower levels of the inflammatory markers interleukin-6 and procalcitonin at the end of the treatment period than at baseline, whereas those who received pentoxifylline alone did not. Vitamin C plus pentoxifylline also significantly increased total antioxidant capacity, but pentoxifylline alone did not. Both treatments significantly increased nitrite levels (suggesting higher oxygen levels) from baseline values and reduced levels of the inflammatory marker C-reactive protein, but neither treatment affected the lipid peroxidation index (a measure of oxidative stress). The COVID A to Z trial compared the effects of daily supplementation with 8,000 mg ascorbic acid, 50 mg zinc (as zinc gluconate), or both for 10 days with standard of care in 214 adults (mean age 45.2 years) with COVID-19 who were not hospitalized [231]. None of the supplements shortened symptom duration.

Studies have also examined the effects of vitamin C administered intravenously. Intravenous administration of vitamin C can produce plasma concentrations that are much higher than those produced by oral doses [232]. FDA classifies intravenous forms of vitamin C as drugs; only oral forms can be classified as dietary supplements. According to some case reports from China, for example, high-dose intravenous vitamin C (10–20 g/day administered over 8–10 hours) increased the oxygenation index in 50 patients with moderate to severe COVID-19; all patients eventually recovered [233].

The LOVIT-COVID and REMAP-CAP trials evaluated the use of intravenous vitamin C in hospitalized patients with COVID-19 in Asia, North America, Europe, and Australia [234]. Although these trials were initially separate, the researchers chose to combine the data from the two trials before enrollment began. The trials randomized 1,568 patients who were critically ill in the ICU and 1,022 hospitalized patients who were not critically ill (median age 60–62 years) to two treatment arms: a vitamin C arm or a control arm (in which patients received either placebo or no vitamin C). Patients who received vitamin C were given intravenous vitamin C (50 mg/kg of body weight) every 6 hours for 96 hours. The trials stopped recruitment when it became apparent that vitamin C was likely to be ineffective or could worsen patient outcomes. After reviewing the data from the trials, the authors reported that administering vitamin C to these patients did not increase the number of organ support-free days or improve the odds of survival to hospital discharge.

In a pilot trial in China, 56 patients (mean age 66.7 years) with COVID-19 in the ICU received either intravenous vitamin C (12 g twice daily) or placebo for 7 days or until ICU discharge or death [235]. Vitamin C administration did not affect 28-day mortality rates. An open-label trial in Pakistan randomized 150 hospitalized patients (mean age 52–53 years) with severe COVID-19 to receive intravenous vitamin C (50 mg/kg/day) plus standard of care or standard of care alone [236]. There were no significant differences between the groups in the number of patients who required mechanical ventilation or who died; however, COVID-19 symptoms resolved faster in patients who received vitamin C than in those who received standard of care (mean of 7.1 days vs. 9.6 days), and patients who received vitamin C spent less time in the hospital (mean of 8.1 days vs. 10.7 days). Other small, short-term studies of intravenous vitamin C found this treatment did not provide a clinical benefit to patients with COVID-19 [237,238].

The National Institutes of Health (NIH) COVID-19 Treatment Guidelines Panel concludes that there are insufficient data to support a recommendation for or against the use of vitamin C to treat COVID-19 in nonhospitalized patients [23]. Because clinical trials have not shown a clinical benefit of vitamin C in hospitalized patients with COVID-19, the COVID-19 Treatment Guidelines Panel recommends against using vitamin C to treat these patients.
Safety

Vitamin C in foods and dietary supplements is safe at intakes up to 400 to 1,800 mg/day for children, depending on age, and up to 2,000 mg/day for adults [202]. These upper limits, however, do not apply to individuals receiving vitamin C treatment under the care of a physician. Higher intakes can cause diarrhea, nausea, and abdominal cramps. High vitamin C doses might also cause falsely high or low readings on some blood glucose meters that are used to monitor glucose levels in people with diabetes [239-241]. In people with hemochromatosis, high doses of vitamin C could exacerbate iron overload and damage body tissues [202,222]. The FNB recommends that these individuals be cautious about consuming vitamin C doses above the RDA [202].

Vitamin C supplementation might interact with some medications. For example, it might reduce the effectiveness of radiation therapy and chemotherapy by protecting tumor cells from the action of these agents [242].

More information on vitamin C is available in the ODS health professional fact sheet on vitamin C.
Vitamin D

Vitamin D, whose forms are vitamin D2 and vitamin D3, is an essential nutrient that is naturally present in only a few foods, such as fatty fish (including salmon and tuna) and fish liver oils. Small amounts can also be found in beef liver, cheese, and egg yolks. Fortified foods, especially fortified milk, provide most of the vitamin D in American diets. The RDA for vitamin D ranges from 10 to 15 mcg (400–600 IU) for children, depending on age, and from 15 to 20 mcg (600–800 IU) for adults [243]. The body can also synthesize vitamin D from sun exposure.

Vitamin D obtained from sun exposure, foods, and supplements is biologically inert and must undergo two hydroxylations in the body for activation. The first hydroxylation, which occurs in the liver, converts vitamin D to 25-hydroxyvitamin D (25(OH)D). The second hydroxylation occurs primarily in the kidney and forms the physiologically active 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D (1,25(OH)2D). Serum concentration of 25(OH)D is currently the main indicator of vitamin D status [243]. Researchers have not definitively identified the serum concentrations of 25(OH)D that are associated with vitamin D deficiency and adequacy. The FNB considers people with levels below 30 nmol/L (12 ng/mL) to be at risk of vitamin D deficiency; levels of 50 nmol/L (20 ng/mL) or more are considered adequate for bone health and overall health in most people [243]. However, the 25(OH)D levels used in clinical trials to define deficient and adequate vitamin D status vary.

In addition to its well-known effects on calcium absorption and bone health, vitamin D plays a role in immunity [244]. Vitamin D appears to lower viral replication rates, suppress inflammation, and increase levels of T-regulatory cells and their activity [24,123,245-249]. In addition, immune cells (e.g., B lymphocytes, T lymphocytes) express the vitamin D receptor, and some immune cells (e.g., macrophages, dendritic cells) can convert 25(OH)D into 1,25(OH)2D. This ability suggests that vitamin D might modulate both innate and adaptive immune responses [24,245,247,249].

Vitamin D deficiency affects the body’s susceptibility to infection and has been associated with influenza, hepatitis C, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), and other viral diseases [250,251]. Surveys indicate that most people in the United States consume less than the recommended amounts of vitamin D [252]. Nevertheless, according to a 2011–2014 analysis of serum 25(OH)D concentrations, most people in the United States age 1 year and older had adequate vitamin D status [253]. Sun exposure, which increases serum 25(OH)D levels, is one of the reasons serum 25(OH)D levels are usually higher than would be predicted on the basis of dietary vitamin D intakes alone [243].
Efficacy

Because some evidence suggests that vitamin D supplementation helps prevent respiratory tract infections, particularly in people with 25(OH)D levels less than 25 nmol/L (10 ng/mL) [254], some scientists have evaluated the use of vitamin D for COVID-19.

Some studies link lower vitamin D status with a higher incidence of COVID-19 and more severe disease [215,255-263], but others do not [264-268]. For example, a comparison of serum 25(OH)D levels in 335 patients with COVID-19 in China with levels in 560 age- and sex-matched healthy participants found significantly lower 25(OH)D concentrations (median of 26.5 nmol/L [10.6 ng/mL]) in patients with COVID-19 than in healthy participants (median of 32.5 nmol/L [13 ng/mL]) [256]. In addition, the prevalence of vitamin D deficiency (defined as serum 25(OH)D <30 nmol/L [12 ng/mL]) was significantly higher in patients with COVID-19 than in healthy participants, and vitamin D deficiency was associated with more severe COVID-19. A systematic review and meta-analysis of 31 observational studies did not find significant associations between serum 25(OH)D levels below 50 nmol/L (20 ng/ml) and the incidence of COVID-19, risk of mortality, ICU admission, or need for ventilation among patients with COVID-19 [269]. However, this analysis found that mean 25(OH)D levels were significantly lower in patients with COVID-19 than in healthy individuals, based on the results from five studies that examined this outcome.

Other studies found that people with vitamin D deficiency were more likely to have COVID-19 and a poorer prognosis than those who were vitamin D sufficient [215,270-274] and that people who regularly took vitamin D supplements (amounts not specified) were less likely to develop COVID-19 than those who did not [275]. For example, a retrospective study of 4,638 individuals (mean age 52.8 years) who were tested for COVID-19 examined associations between vitamin D levels (measured during the previous year but not within 14 days of COVID-19 testing) and COVID-19 test results [276]. Black individuals with 25(OH)D levels below 100 nmol/L (40 ng/mL) had a higher risk of COVID-19 than those with higher levels, but the results showed no associations between 25(OH)D levels and the risk of COVID-19 among White individuals.

Some of these investigators did not consider confounders, such as obesity and race. Many people with obesity, for example, have lower vitamin D status and more severe COVID-19 than individuals with a healthy weight [243,277]. An analysis of 348,598 U.K. Biobank participants (median age 49 years), of whom 449 had COVID-19, did not find a link between 25(OH)D concentrations and the risk of SARS-CoV-2 infection after adjusting for confounders, including ethnicity, body mass index (BMI) category, age at assessment, and sex [268].

A systematic review and meta‐analysis of 17 observational studies examined the association between 25(OH)D levels and the severity of COVID‐19 [278]. The studies included in this analysis were conducted in Europe, the United States, Asia, and the Middle East and had enrolled a total of 2,756 adults with COVID-19. The authors reported that patients with vitamin D deficiency had an increased risk of mortality, a higher rate of hospitalization, and longer hospital stays than patients who were not deficient. In this analysis, the researchers used the 25(OH)D levels defined by the individual studies to assess vitamin D deficiency. Other systematic reviews and meta-analyses have found that patients with COVID-19 who have vitamin D deficiency or lower vitamin D status or who do not take vitamin D supplements have more severe disease and higher mortality rates than others [279-281]. However, these reviews found inconsistent associations between vitamin D status and the risk of SARS-CoV-2 infection.

Although many observational studies suggest a link between low vitamin D status and a higher incidence of COVID-19 and more severe disease, vitamin D status measurements after disease onset might not reflect preinfection vitamin D status. In a small study in nine healthy men (median age 22 years), administration of a lipopolysaccharide to induce systemic inflammation significantly reduced 25(OH)D levels within hours [27]. Because COVID-19 induces an inflammatory response, some of the associations between low 25(OH)D concentrations and COVID-19 might be explained by reverse causality (i.e., the disease might have caused the low 25(OH)D concentrations).

Some observational studies have examined whether vitamin D supplementation might reduce COVID-19 severity [97,157,282-284]. For example, an analysis of data on 77 hospitalized adults (mean age 88 years) with COVID-19 in France (where vitamin D supplementation is routinely recommended for those over 65 years of age) found that those who had received bolus oral doses of 1,250 mcg (50,000 IU) vitamin D3 per month or 2,000 mcg (80,000 IU) or 2,500 mcg (100,000 IU) vitamin D3 every 2 or 3 months throughout the preceding year had less severe disease and lower mortality rates than those who did not receive vitamin D supplementation [282]. An observational study in the United Kingdom found that of 444 hospitalized patients (median age 74 years) with COVID-19, those who received various vitamin D3 regimens with doses of 500 to 1,250 mcg (20,000–50,000 IU) daily to biweekly for 7 days to 7 weeks had a lower risk of death from the disease [284]. This finding was replicated in another cohort of 542 hospitalized patients, some of whom received similar doses of vitamin D3 supplements [284].

A randomized clinical trial in Mexico found that a moderate dose of vitamin D3 reduced the risk of SARS-CoV-2 infection in frontline health care workers who were caring for patients with COVID-19 [285]. In this trial, which was conducted before COVID-19 vaccines were available, health care workers (median age 37.5 years) from four hospitals in Mexico City received either 100 mcg (4,000 IU) vitamin D3 or placebo daily for 30 days. Of the 192 participants who completed follow-up, those who received vitamin D3 were 77% less likely to acquire SARS-CoV-2 infection than those who received placebo. In addition, this protective effect was independent of baseline vitamin D status.

Several other randomized clinical trials have investigated the use of high doses of vitamin D3 in people with COVID-19. A clinical trial in 240 hospitalized patients (mean age 56.2 years) with moderate to severe COVID-19 compared the effects of a single dose of 5,000 mcg (200,000 IU) vitamin D3 administered about 10 days after symptom onset with placebo [286]. The mean baseline 25(OH)D level among participants was 52.3 nmol/L (20.9 ng/mL). Vitamin D did not significantly reduce the length of hospitalization or the risk of mortality while hospitalized, ICU admission, or the need for mechanical ventilation, even among the 115 patients with vitamin D deficiency at baseline (defined as 25(OH)D <50 nmol/L [20 ng/mL]).

In the open-label COVIT-TRIAL, 254 patients (median age 88 years) with COVID-19 at nine medical centers in France were randomized to receive a single high dose of vitamin D3 (10,000 mcg [400,000 IU]) or a lower dose (1,250 mcg [50,000 IU]) [287]. The study found that the high dose of vitamin D3 reduced overall mortality among patients at day 14, suggesting that this dose had a protective effect. However, by day 28, there was no longer a significant difference in mortality between the high-dose group and the lower-dose group. A clinical trial in Argentina evaluated the effect of a single high dose of vitamin D3 in 218 hospitalized patients (mean age 59.1 years) with COVID-19 [288]. The patients were randomized to receive either 12,500 mcg (500,000 IU) vitamin D3 or placebo. Compared with placebo, the single dose of vitamin D3 did not prevent respiratory worsening or shorten the length of hospital stay. It also did not affect rates of ICU admission or in-hospital mortality.

Another clinical trial in Saudi Arabia compared the effects of 125 mcg (5,000 IU) vitamin D3 daily for 14 days with the effects of 25 mcg (1,000 IU) vitamin D3 in 69 adults (mean age 49.8 years) who were hospitalized with mild to moderate COVID-19 [289]. Patients who received 125 mcg vitamin D had shorter durations of coughing (mean of 6.2 days vs. 9.1 days) and loss of taste (mean of 11.4 days vs. 16.9 days) than those who received 25 mcg, but the durations of other symptoms—including fever, fatigue, headache, sore throat, body aches, and chills—did not differ between the groups.

The Vitamin D for COVID-19 (VIVID) trial is examining whether vitamin D3 supplementation helps reduce the severity of COVID-19 and the risk of transmission to household members [290]. The study has enrolled 2,024 adults age 30 years and older; roughly half are people who had received a COVID-19 diagnosis within 7 days of enrollment, and the other half are close household contacts who were not vaccinated. The participants will receive vitamin D3 for 28 days (240 mcg [9,600 IU] on days 1 and 2, followed by 80 mcg [3,200 IU] on days 3 through 28).

The NIH COVID-19 Treatment Guidelines Panel states that data are currently insufficient to support a recommendation for or against the use of vitamin D to prevent or treat COVID-19 [24].
Safety

Daily intakes of up to 25 to 100 mcg (1,000–4,000 IU) vitamin D in foods and dietary supplements are safe for infants and children, depending on age, and intakes up to 100 mcg (4,000 IU) are safe for adults [243]. These upper limits, however, do not apply to individuals receiving vitamin D treatment under the care of a physician. Higher intakes (usually from supplements) can lead to nausea, vomiting, muscle weakness, confusion, pain, loss of appetite, dehydration, excessive urination and thirst, and kidney stones. In extreme cases, vitamin D toxicity causes renal failure, calcification of soft tissues throughout the body (including in coronary vessels and heart valves), cardiac arrhythmias, and even death [291-293].

Several types of medications might interact with vitamin D. For example, orlistat, statins, and steroids can reduce vitamin D levels [294,295]. In addition, taking vitamin D supplements with thiazide diuretics might lead to hypercalcemia [294].

More information on vitamin D is available in the ODS health professional fact sheet on vitamin D.
Vitamin E

Vitamin E, also called alpha-tocopherol, is an essential nutrient that is present in several foods, including nuts, seeds, vegetable oils, and green leafy vegetables. The RDA for vitamin E is 4 to 15 mg for infants and children, depending on age, and 15 to 19 mg for adults [202].

Vitamin E is an antioxidant that plays an important role in immune function by helping to maintain cell membrane integrity and by enhancing antibody production, lymphocyte proliferation, and natural killer cell activity [104,205,244,296,297]. Vitamin E has also been shown to limit inflammation by inhibiting the production of proinflammatory cytokines [298]. Vitamin E deficiency impairs both humoral and cell-mediated immunity and increases susceptibility to infections [205,297,299]. Some studies suggest that taking high doses of vitamin E supplements (60–800 mg/day) for 1 to 8 months enhances lymphocyte proliferation, interleukin-2 production, and natural killer cell activity in adults age 60 or older [300-302].

Frank vitamin E deficiency is rare, except in individuals with intestinal malabsorption disorders [202,244]. For this reason, research on the ability of vitamin E to improve immune function tends to use supplemental vitamin E rather than simply ensuring that study participants achieve adequate vitamin E status [297].
Efficacy

Vitamin E plays a role in immune function. However, studies that have evaluated the efficacy of vitamin E supplementation in people with infectious diseases, such as respiratory tract infections, have reported mixed results [299,303-306]. A very limited amount of research has been conducted on vitamin E and COVID-19.

A small clinical trial in Mexico examined the effects of 800 mg vitamin E (as alpha-tocopheryl acetate) every 12 hours for 5 days plus the drug pentoxifylline in 22 hospitalized adults (mean age 57.9 years) with pneumonia that resulted from COVID-19 [126]. Another group of 22 patients received pentoxifylline alone. Patients who received vitamin E and pentoxifylline had significantly lower levels of the inflammatory markers interleukin-6 and procalcitonin than at baseline, whereas those who received pentoxifylline alone did not. Vitamin E plus pentoxifylline also significantly decreased the lipid peroxidation index (a measure of oxidative stress), but pentoxifylline alone did not. Both treatments significantly increased nitrite levels (suggesting higher oxygen levels) and reduced levels of the inflammatory marker C-reactive protein, but neither treatment affected total antioxidant capacity.
Safety

All intake levels of vitamin E in foods are considered safe. Up to 200 mg to 800 mg/day supplemental vitamin E is safe for children, depending on age, and up to 1,000 mg/day is safe for adults [202]. These upper limits, however, do not apply to individuals receiving vitamin E under the care of a physician. Because vitamin E has anticoagulant effects, high vitamin E intakes can increase the risk of bleeding and cause hemorrhagic stroke.

Vitamin E supplementation might interact with certain medications, including anticoagulant and antiplatelet medications. It might also reduce the effectiveness of radiation therapy and chemotherapy by protecting tumor cells from the action of these agents [242,307,308].

More information on vitamin E is available in the ODS health professional fact sheet on vitamin E.
Zinc

Zinc is an essential nutrient that is present in a wide variety of foods. The highest amounts of zinc are found in animal foods, including oysters, crab, lobster, beef, pork, and poultry. Beans, nuts, whole grains, and dairy products also contain some zinc. The RDA for zinc is 2 to 13 mg for infants and children, depending on age, and 8 to 12 mg for adults [309].

Zinc is involved in numerous aspects of cellular metabolism. Zinc is necessary for the catalytic activity of approximately 100 enzymes, and it plays a role in many body processes, including both the innate and adaptive immune systems [14,309-312]. Zinc also has antiviral and anti-inflammatory properties, and it helps maintain the integrity of tissue barriers, such as the respiratory epithelia [9,123,313,314]. In addition, zinc is involved in the sense of taste.

Zinc deficiency adversely affects immune function by impairing the formation, activation, and maturation of lymphocytes. In addition, zinc deficiency alters the ratios of helper and suppressor T cells, decreases production of interleukin-2, and decreases activity of natural killer cells and cytotoxic T cells [14,209,310,312,315]. Furthermore, zinc deficiency is associated with elevated levels of proinflammatory mediators [313]. These effects on immune response probably increase susceptibility to infections [316] and inflammatory diseases, especially those affecting the lungs [313].

Studies have found associations between low zinc status and an increased risk of viral infections [244], and people with zinc deficiency have a higher risk of diarrhea and respiratory diseases [14]. Poor zinc status is also common among individuals with HIV and hepatitis C and is a risk factor for pneumonia in older adults [209,314,317,318].

Although zinc deficiency is not common in the United States, 15% of the U.S. population might obtain marginal amounts of zinc [319]. Older adults are among the groups most likely to have low intakes.
Efficacy

Because of zinc’s role in the immune system and in maintaining epithelial integrity, its antiviral activities, and its anti-inflammatory effects, some studies have investigated whether adequate zinc intakes might reduce the risk of COVID-19 and the severity of some of its symptoms, including diarrhea and the loss of taste and smell. Evidence that zinc lozenges might help shorten the duration of the common cold [320] also spurred interest in using zinc supplementation in patients with COVID-19.

An observational study of 249 patients (median age 65 years) with COVID-19 who were admitted to a hospital in Spain found that patients with serum zinc levels lower than 50 mcg/dL had more severe disease at admission, took longer to recover (median of 25 days vs. 8 days), and had higher mortality rates (21% vs. 5%) than those with higher zinc levels [321]. A similar study in India found that 47 hospitalized patients (median age 34 years) with COVID-19 had lower median serum zinc levels at admission (74.5 mcg/dL) than 45 randomly selected healthy individuals who were not hospitalized and were used as a control group (median age 32 years; 105.8 mcg/dL); however, both of these median values would be considered normal [322]. In addition, patients with COVID-19 who had zinc levels below 80 mcg/dL had higher rates of complications than those with higher levels. Mean serum zinc concentrations were also lower (71.7 mcg/dL) in 35 hospitalized patients (median age 77 years) with COVID-19 in Germany, especially in the six patients who did not survive the disease, than in a group of randomly chosen healthy individuals who were used as control group (97.6 mcg/dL) [323]. However, hypozincemia is part of the acute-phase response during infection, and zinc concentrations can also decline substantially as a result of acute physiological stress [324].

In a case report from the United States, four patients age 26 to 63 years with COVID-19 were treated with high-dose zinc citrate, zinc gluconate, or zinc acetate lozenges every 2 to 4 hours for a total dose of 115 to 184 mg/day zinc for 10 to 14 days [325]. The symptoms—including fever, cough, headache, shortness of breath, body aches, and fatigue—in all four patients began to decline within 24 hours of starting the zinc treatment, and all patients ultimately recovered. However, case studies such as these that do not have a placebo control arm cannot show whether the treatment was responsible for the outcomes.

A retrospective study compared mortality rates among 242 patients who were hospitalized with COVID-19; 196 patients (median age 65 years) received supplementation with 100 mg/day zinc (as zinc sulfate), and 46 patients (median age 71 years) received no supplements [326]. Zinc supplementation did not affect mortality rates.

The COVID A to Z trial compared the effects of daily supplementation with 50 mg zinc (as zinc gluconate), 8,000 mg ascorbic acid, or both for 10 days with standard of care in 214 adults (mean age 45.2 years) who had COVID-19 and were not hospitalized [231]. Zinc, ascorbic acid, and the combination of zinc and ascorbic acid did not shorten the duration of symptoms. In a study in Tunisia, 470 adults (mean age 54.2 years) with COVID-19 were randomized to receive either 25 mg of zinc twice daily for 15 days or placebo [327]. This study enrolled both inpatients and outpatients with COVID-19. Compared with patients in the placebo group, those who received zinc had a 42% lower risk of the combined outcome of death or admission to the ICU within 30 days of randomization. This difference was primarily due to a reduction in ICU admissions, because the death rate was not significantly different between the groups. Inpatients who received zinc had shorter hospital stays than those who received placebo (mean of 7.1 days vs. 10.6 days). Outpatients who received zinc had a shorter duration of COVID-19 symptoms than those who received placebo (mean of 9.6 days vs. 12.8 days), although the two groups had similar hospital admission rates. Some concerns were raised about the data presented in this study [328]. The study authors acknowledged that the original paper included some errors and provided corrections in a subsequent publication [329]. However, the authors stated that these errors did not affect the overall conclusions of the trial.

According to the NIH COVID-19 Treatment Guidelines Panel, data are insufficient to recommend for or against the use of zinc supplements to treat COVID-19 [22]. In addition, the COVID-19 Treatment Guidelines Panel recommends against using doses of zinc supplements above the RDA to prevent COVID-19, except in a clinical trial.
Safety

Intakes up to 4 to 34 mg/day zinc in foods and dietary supplements are safe for infants and children, depending on age, and intakes up to 40 mg/day are safe for adults [309]. These upper limits, however, do not apply to individuals receiving zinc treatment under the care of a physician. Higher intakes can cause nausea, vomiting, loss of appetite, abdominal cramps, diarrhea, and headaches [64,309]. Chronic consumption of 150 to 450 mg/day can cause low copper status, reduced immune function, and reduced levels of high-density lipoproteins [330]. In clinical trials among children, using zinc supplementation to treat diarrhea increased the risk of vomiting more than placebo [331,332].

Zinc supplementation might interact with several types of medications. For example, zinc can reduce the absorption of some types of antibiotics as well as penicillamine, a drug used to treat rheumatoid arthritis [333,334]. In addition, some medications, such as thiazide diuretics and certain antibiotics, can reduce zinc absorption [335,336].

More information on zinc is available in the ODS health professional fact sheet on zinc.
References

    Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. About COVID-19. 2024.
    Berlin DA, Gulick RM, Martinez FJ. Severe Covid-19. N Engl J Med 2020;383:2451-60. [PubMed abstract]
    Fajgenbaum DC, June CH. Cytokine storm. N Engl J Med 2020;383:2255-73. [PubMed abstract]
    Brightling CE, Evans RA. Long COVID: which symptoms can be attributed to SARS-CoV-2 infection? Lancet 2022;400:411-3. [PubMed abstract]
    Davis HE, Assaf GS, McCorkell L, Wei H, Low RJ, Re’em Y, et al. Characterizing Long COVID in an International Cohort: 7 Months of symptoms and their impact. medRxiv 2021:2020.12.24.20248802. [PubMed abstract]
    Huang C, Huang L, Wang Y, Li X, Ren L, et al. 6-month consequences of COVID-19 in patients discharged from hospital: a cohort study. Lancet. 2023 Jun 17;401(10393):e21-e33. [PubMed abstract]
    Greenhalgh T, Knight M, A'Court C, Buxton M, Husain L. Management of post-acute covid-19 in primary care. BMJ 2020;370:m3026. [PubMed abstract]
    Rubin R. As their numbers grow, COVID-19 "long haulers" stump experts. JAMA 2020. [PubMed abstract]
    Calder PC. Nutrition and immunity: lessons from coronavirus disease-2019. Proc Nutr Soc 2023:1-16. [PubMed abstract]
    Hamulka J, Jeruszka-Bielak M, Górnicka M, Drywień ME, Zielinska-Pukos MA. Dietary supplements during COVID-19 outbreak. Results of Google Trends analysis supported by PLifeCOVID-19 online studies. Nutrients 2020;13. [PubMed abstract]
    Nutrition Business Journal. Condition Specific Report 2024. 2024.
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Questions and Answers on Dietary Supplements. 2019.
    Parkin J, Cohen B. An overview of the immune system. Lancet 2001;357:1777-89. [PubMed abstract]
    Calder PC, Carr AC, Gombart AF, Eggersdorfer M. Optimal nutritional status for a well-functioning immune system is an important factor to protect against viral infections. Nutrients 2020;12. [PubMed abstract]
    Brendler T, Al-Harrasi A, Bauer R, Gafner S, Hardy ML, Heinrich M, et al. Botanical drugs and supplements affecting the immune response in the time of COVID-19: Implications for research and clinical practice. Phytother Res: PTR 2020. [PubMed abstract]
    Chen L, Deng H, Cui H, Fang J, Zuo Z, Deng J, et al. Inflammatory responses and inflammation-associated diseases in organs. Oncotarget 2018;9:7204-18. [PubMed abstract]
    Lehtoranta L, Latvala S, Lehtinen MJ. Role of probiotics in stimulating the immune system in viral respiratory tract infections: a narrative review. Nutrients 2020;12. [PubMed abstract]
    Gao YM, Xu G, Wang B, Liu BC. Cytokine storm syndrome in coronavirus disease 2019: A narrative review. J Intern Med 2020. [PubMed abstract]
    Venturi S, Venturi M. Iodine, thymus, and immunity. Nutrition 2009;25:977-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Albers R, Antoine JM, Bourdet-Sicard R, Calder PC, Gleeson M, et al. Markers to measure immunomodulation in human nutrition intervention studies. Br J Nutr 2005;94:452-81. [PubMed abstract]
    Albers R, Bourdet-Sicard R, Braun D, Calder PC, Herz U, et al. Monitoring immune modulation by nutrition in the general population: identifying and substantiating effects on human health. Br J Nutr 2013;110 Suppl 2:S1-30. [PubMed abstract]
    National Institutes of Health. COVID-19 Treatment Guidelines, Zinc. 2023.
    National Institutes of Health. COVID-19 Treatment Guidelines, Vitamin C. 2023.
    National Institutes of Health. COVID-19 Treatment Guidelines, Vitamin D. 2023.
    Costello RB, Rosanoff A. Magnesium In: Marriott BP, Birt DF, Stallings VA, Yates AA, eds. Present Knowledge in Nutrition Cambridge, MA: Elsevier; 2020:349-74.
    Raisi-Estabragh Z, Martineau AR, Curtis EM, Moon RJ, Darling A, et al. Vitamin D and coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19): rapid evidence review. Aging Clin Exp Res 2021;33:2031-41. [PubMed abstract]
    Smolders J, van den Ouweland J, Geven C, Pickkers P, Kox M. Letter to the Editor: Vitamin D deficiency in COVID-19: Mixing up cause and consequence. Metabolism 2021;115:154434. [PubMed abstract]
    Gurley BJ, Fifer EK, Gardner Z. Pharmacokinetic herb-drug interactions (part 2): drug interactions involving popular botanical dietary supplements and their clinical relevance. Planta Med 2012;78:1490-514. [PubMed abstract]
    Weber WJ, Hopp DC. National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health perspectives on clinical research involving natural products. Drug Metab Dispos 2020;48:963-5. [PubMed abstract]
    Cáceres DD, Hancke JL, Burgos RA, Sandberg F, Wikman GK. Use of visual analogue scale measurements (VAS) to asses the effectiveness of standardized Andrographis paniculata extract SHA-10 in reducing the symptoms of common cold. A randomized double blind-placebo study. Phytomedicine 1999;6:217-23. [PubMed abstract]
    Akbar S. Andrographis paniculata: a review of pharmacological activities and clinical effects. Altern Med Rev 2011;16:66-77. [PubMed abstract]
    Hu XY, Wu RH, Logue M, Blondel C, Lai LYW, Stuart B, et al. Andrographis paniculata (Chuān Xīn Lián) for symptomatic relief of acute respiratory tract infections in adults and children: A systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS One 2017;12:e0181780. [PubMed abstract]
    Coon JT, Ernst E. Andrographis paniculata in the treatment of upper respiratory tract infections: a systematic review of safety and efficacy. Planta Med 2004;70:293-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Kligler B, Ulbricht C, Basch E, Kirkwood CD, Abrams TR, Miranda M, et al. Andrographis paniculata for the treatment of upper respiratory infection: a systematic review by the natural standard research collaboration. Explore (New York, NY) 2006;2:25-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Puri A, Saxena R, Saxena RP, Saxena KC, Srivastava V, Tandon JS. Immunostimulant agents from Andrographis paniculata. J Nat Prod 1993;56:995-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Banerjee A, Czinn SJ, Reiter RJ, Blanchard TG. Crosstalk between endoplasmic reticulum stress and anti-viral activities: A novel therapeutic target for COVID-19. Life Sci 2020;255:117842. [PubMed abstract]
    Enmozhi SK, Raja K, Sebastine I, Joseph J. Andrographolide as a potential inhibitor of SARS-CoV-2 main protease: an in silico approach. J Biomol Struct Dyn 2020:1-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Murugan NA, Pandian CJ, Jeyakanthan J. Computational investigation on Andrographis paniculata phytochemicals to evaluate their potency against SARS-CoV-2 in comparison to known antiviral compounds in drug trials. J Biomol Struct Dyn 2020:1-12. [PubMed abstract]
    Silveira D, Prieto-Garcia JM, Boylan F, Estrada O, Fonseca-Bazzo YM, JAMAl CM, et al. COVID-19: Is there evidence for the use of herbal medicines as adjuvant symptomatic therapy? Front Pharmacol 2020;11:581840. [PubMed abstract]
    Wagner L, Cramer H, Klose P, Lauche R, Gass F, Dobos G, et al. Herbal medicine for cough: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Forsch Komplementmed 2015;22:359-68. [PubMed abstract]
    Poolsup N, Suthisisang C, Prathanturarug S, Asawamekin A, Chanchareon U. Andrographis paniculata in the symptomatic treatment of uncomplicated upper respiratory tract infection: systematic review of randomized controlled trials. J Clin Pharm Ther 2004;29:37-45. [PubMed abstract]
    Shi TH, Huang YL, Chen CC, Pi WC, Hsu YL, Lo LC, et al. Andrographolide and its fluorescent derivative inhibit the main proteases of 2019-nCoV and SARS-CoV through covalent linkage. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2020. [PubMed abstract]
    Kesheh MM, Shavandi S, Haeri Moghaddam N, Ramezani M, Ramezani F. Effect of herbal compounds on coronavirus; a systematic review and meta-analysis. Virol J 2022;19:87. [PubMed abstract]
    American Botanical Council. Thailand approves Asian herb andrographis to treat COVID-19. HerbalEGram 2021.
    The Nation Thailand. Two hospitals ready to trial traditional Thai medicine in treating COVID-19. 2020.
    The Nation Thailand. Trials underway to test efficacy of Andrographis Paniculata extract for COVID-19. 2020.
    The Nation Thailand. Study shows Fah Talai Jone may kill Covid-19, but can offer no protection. 2020.
    Bloomberg. Thailand clears use of herbal medicine for Covid-19 treatment. 2020.
    Tanwettiyanont J, Piriyachananusorn N, Sangsoi L, Boonsong B, Sunpapoa C, et al. Use of Andrographis paniculata (Burm.f.) Wall. ex Nees and risk of pneumonia in hospitalised patients with mild coronavirus disease 2019: A retrospective cohort study. Front Med (Lausanne) 2022;9:947373. [PubMed abstract]
    Siripongboonsitti T, Ungtrakul T, Tawinprai K, Auewarakul C, Chartisathian W, et al. Efficacy of Andrographis paniculata extract treatment in mild to moderate COVID-19 patients being treated with favipiravir: A double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled study (APFaVi trial). Phytomedicine 2023;119:155018. [PubMed abstract]
    Ratiani L, Pachkoria E, Mamageishvili N, Shengelia R, Hovhannisyan A, Panossian A. Efficacy of Kan Jang(®) in Patients with Mild COVID-19: Interim Analysis of a Randomized, Quadruple-Blind, Placebo-Controlled Trial. Pharmaceuticals (Basel, Switzerland) 2022;15. [PubMed abstract]
    Natural Medicines Comprehensive Database. Andrographis. 2022.
    Amroyan E, Gabrielian E, Panossian A, Wikman G, Wagner H. Inhibitory effect of andrographolide from Andrographis paniculata on PAF-induced platelet aggregation. Phytomedicine 1999;6:27-31. [PubMed abstract]
    Zhang CY, Tan BK. Mechanisms of cardiovascular activity of Andrographis paniculata in the anaesthetized rat. J Ethnopharmacol 1997;56:97-101. [PubMed abstract]
    Sharifi-Rad M, Mnayer D, Morais-Braga MFB, Carneiro JNP, Bezerra CF, Coutinho HDM, et al. Echinacea plants as antioxidant and antibacterial agents: From traditional medicine to biotechnological applications. Phytother Res: PTR 2018;32:1653-63. [PubMed abstract]
    LiverTox. Echinacea. In: LiverTox: Clinical and Research Information on Drug-Induced Liver Injury. Bethesda (MD): National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases; 2012. [PubMed abstract]
    Aucoin M, Cardozo V, McLaren MD, Garber A, Remy D, et al. A systematic review on the effects of Echinacea supplementation on cytokine levels: Is there a role in COVID-19? Metabol Open 2021;11:100115. [PubMed abstract]
    David S, Cunningham R. Echinacea for the prevention and treatment of upper respiratory tract infections: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Complement Ther Med 2019;44:18-26. [PubMed abstract]
    Karsch-Völk M, Barrett B, Kiefer D, Bauer R, Ardjomand-Woelkart K, Linde K. Echinacea for preventing and treating the common cold. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2014;2:Cd000530. [PubMed abstract]
    Signer J, Jonsdottir HR, Albrich WC, Strasser M, Züst R, Ryter S, et al. In vitro virucidal activity of Echinaforce®, an Echinacea purpurea preparation, against coronaviruses, including common cold coronavirus 229E and SARS-CoV-2. Virol J 2020;17:136. [PubMed abstract]
    Mesri M, Esmaeili Saber SS, Godazi M, Roustaei Shirdel A, Montazer R, Koohestani HR, et al. The effects of combination of Zingiber officinale and Echinacea on alleviation of clinical symptoms and hospitalization rate of suspected COVID-19 outpatients: a randomized controlled trial. J Complement Integr Med 2021. [PubMed abstract]
    Kolev E, Mircheva L, Edwards MR, Johnston SL, Kalinov K, Stange R, et al. Echinacea Purpurea For the Long-Term Prevention of Viral Respiratory Tract Infections During Covid-19 Pandemic: A Randomized, Open, Controlled, Exploratory Clinical Study. Front Pharmacol 2022;13:856410. [PubMed abstract]
    Aucoin M, Cooley K, Saunders PR, Carè J, Anheyer D, Medina DN, et al. The effect of Echinacea spp. on the prevention or treatment of COVID-19 and other respiratory tract infections in humans: A rapid review. Adv Integr Med 2020. [PubMed abstract]
    Crawford C, Brown LL, Costello RB, Deuster PA. Select Dietary Supplement Ingredients for Preserving and Protecting the Immune System in Healthy Individuals: A Systematic Review. Nutrients 2022;14:4604. [PubMed abstract]
    Jawad M, Schoop R, Suter A, Klein P, Eccles R. Safety and efficacy profile of Echinacea purpurea to prevent common cold episodes: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med 2012:841315. [PubMed abstract]
    Holst L, Havnen GC, Nordeng H. Echinacea and elderberry-should they be used against upper respiratory tract infections during pregnancy? Front Pharmacol 2014;5:31. [PubMed abstract]
    Penzak SR, Robertson SM, Hunt JD, Chairez C, Malati CY, Alfaro RM, et al. Echinacea purpurea significantly induces cytochrome P450 3A activity but does not alter lopinavir-ritonavir exposure in healthy subjects. Pharmacotherapy 2010;30:797-805. NEW PMID 20653355 [PubMed abstract]
    Natural Medicines Comprehensive Database. Echinacea. 2021.
    Gafner S, Borchardt T, Bush M, Sudberg S, Feuillere NG, Tenon MYR, et al. Tales from the elder: adulteration issues of elder berry. HerbalEGram 2021.
    Porter RS, Bode RF. A review of the antiviral properties of black elder (Sambucus nigra L.) products. Phytother Res: PTR 2017;31:533-54. [PubMed abstract]
    Hawkins J, Baker C, Cherry L, Dunne E. Black elderberry (Sambucus nigra) supplementation effectively treats upper respiratory symptoms: A meta-analysis of randomized, controlled clinical trials. Complement Ther Med 2019;42:361-5. [PubMed abstract]
    Harnett J, Oakes K, Carè J, Leach M, Brown D, Cramer H, et al. The effects of Sambucus nigra berry on acute respiratory viral infections: a rapid review of clinical studies. Adv Integr Med 2020. [PubMed abstract]
    Vlachojannis JE, Cameron M, Chrubasik S. A systematic review on the sambuci fructus effect and efficacy profiles. Phytother Res: PTR 2010;24:1-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Kinoshita E, Hayashi K, Katayama H, Hayashi T, Obata A. Anti-influenza virus effects of elderberry juice and its fractions. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem 2012; 76:1633-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Adams KK, Baker WL, Sobieraj DM. Myth busters: dietary supplements and COVID-19. Ann Pharmacother 2020;54:820-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Wieland LS, Piechotta V, Feinberg T, Ludeman E, Hutton B, Kanji S, et al. Elderberry for prevention and treatment of viral respiratory illnesses: a systematic review. BMC Complement Med Ther 2021;21:112. [PubMed abstract]
    Ulbricht C, Basch E, Cheung L, Goldberg H, Hammerness P, Isaac R, et al. An evidence-based systematic review of elderberry and elderflower (Sambucus nigra) by the Natural Standard Research Collaboration. J Diet Suppl 2014;11:80-120. [PubMed abstract]
    Barak V, Halperin T, Kalickman I. The effect of Sambucol, a black elderberry-based, natural product, on the production of human cytokines: I. Inflammatory cytokines. Eur Cytokine Netw 2001;12:290-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Mancuso C, Santangelo R. Panax ginseng and Panax quinquefolius: From pharmacology to toxicology. Food Chem Toxicol 2017;107:362-72. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service. PLANTS Database. 2020.
    Antonelli M, Donelli D, Firenzuoli F. Ginseng integrative supplementation for seasonal acute upper respiratory infections: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Complement Ther Med 2020;52:102457. [PubMed abstract]
    Coon JT, Ernst E. Panax ginseng: a systematic review of adverse effects and drug interactions. Drug Saf 2002;25:323-44. [PubMed abstract]
    Seida JK, Durec T, Kuhle S. North American (Panax quinquefolius) and Asian Ginseng (Panax ginseng) preparations for prevention of the common cold in healthy adults: a systematic review. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med;2011:282151. [PubMed abstract]
    Greenspan EM. Ginseng and vaginal bleeding. JAMA 1983;249:2018. [PubMed abstract]
    Hopkins MP, Androff L, Benninghoff AS. Ginseng face cream and unexplained vaginal bleeding. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1988;159:1121-2. [PubMed abstract]
    Punnonen R, Lukola A. Oestrogen-like effect of ginseng. Br Med J 1980;281:1110. [PubMed abstract]
    Palmer BV, Montgomery AC, Monteiro JC. Gin Seng and mastalgia. Br Med J 1978;1:1284. [PubMed abstract]
    Seely D, Dugoua JJ, Perri D, Mills E, Koren G. Safety and efficacy of panax ginseng during pregnancy and lactation. Can J Clin Pharmacol 2008;15:e87-94. [PubMed abstract]
    Natural Medicines Comprehensive Database. Panax Ginseng. 2020.
    Sotaniemi EA, Haapakoski E, Rautio A. Ginseng therapy in non-insulin-dependent diabetic patients. Diabetes care 1995;18:1373-5 [PubMed abstract]
    Institute of Medicine. Food and Nutrition Board. Dietary Reference Intakes for Calcium, Phosphorus, Magnesium, Vitamin D, and Fluoride. Washington, DC: National Academy Press; 1997.
    Dominguez LJ, Veronese N, Guerrero-Romero F, Barbagallo M. Magnesium in infectious diseases in older people. Nutrients 2021;13:180. [PubMed abstract]
    Rude RK. Magnesium In: Ross AC, Caballero B, Cousins RJ, Tucker KL, Ziegler TR, eds. Modern Nutrition in Health and Disease Baltimore, Maryland: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2012.
    Story MJ. Essential sufficiency of zinc, ω-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids, vitamin D and magnesium for prevention and treatment of COVID-19, diabetes, cardiovascular diseases, lung diseases and cancer. Biochimie 2021;187:94-109. [PubMed abstract]
    DiNicolantonio JJ, O'Keefe JH. Magnesium and Vitamin D Deficiency as a Potential Cause of Immune Dysfunction, Cytokine Storm and Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation in covid-19 patients. Mo Med 2021;118:68-73. [PubMed abstract]
    Cooper ID, Crofts CAP, DiNicolantonio JJ, Malhotra A, Elliott B, Kyriakidou Y, et al. Relationships between hyperinsulinaemia, magnesium, vitamin D, thrombosis and COVID-19: rationale for clinical management. Open Heart 2020;7. [PubMed abstract]
    Tan CW, Ho LP, Kalimuddin S, Cherng BPZ, Teh YE, Thien SY, et al. Cohort study to evaluate the effect of vitamin D, magnesium, and vitamin B(12) in combination on progression to severe outcomes in older patients with coronavirus (COVID-19). Nutrition 2020;79-80:111017. [PubMed abstract]
    Micke O, Vormann J, Kisters K. Magnesium and COVID-19 - Some Further Comments - A Commentary on Wallace TC. Combating COVID-19 and Building Immune Resilience: A Potential Role for Magnesium Nutrition? J Am Coll Nutr. 2020;1-9. doi:10.1080/07315724.2020.1785971. Cited in: PMID: 32649272. Journal of the American College of Nutrition 2020:1-3. [PubMed abstract]
    Tang CF, Ding H, Jiao RQ, Wu XX, Kong LD. Possibility of magnesium supplementation for supportive treatment in patients with COVID-19. Eur J Pharmacol 2020;886:173546. [PubMed abstract]
    Shechter M, Merz CN, Paul-Labrador M, Meisel SR, Rude RK, Molloy MD, et al. Oral magnesium supplementation inhibits platelet-dependent thrombosis in patients with coronary artery disease. Am J Cardiol 1999;84:152-6. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service. Usual Nutrient Intake from Food and Beverages, by Gender and Age, What We Eat in America, NHANES 2013-2016. 2019.
    Pooransari P, Pourdowlat G. Magnesium Sulfate: A Potential Adjuvant Treatment on COVID-19. Frontiers in Emergency Medicine 2021;5:e1.
    Iotti S, Wolf F, Mazur A, Maier JA. The COVID-19 pandemic: is there a role for magnesium? Hypotheses and perspectives. Magnes Res 2020;33:21-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Shakoor H, Feehan J, Al Dhaheri AS, Ali HI, Platat C, Ismail LC, et al. Immune-boosting role of vitamins D, C, E, zinc, selenium and omega-3 fatty acids: Could they help against COVID-19? Maturitas 2021;143:1-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Maier JA, Castiglioni S, Locatelli L, Zocchi M, Mazur A. Magnesium and inflammation: Advances and perspectives. Semin Cell Dev Biol 2021;115:37-44. [PubMed abstract]
    Hosseini B, Saedisomeolia A, Allman-Farinelli M. Association between antioxidant intake/status and obesity: a systematic review of observational studies. Biol Trace Elem Res 2017;175:287-97. [PubMed abstract]
    Alamdari NM, Afaghi S, Rahimi FS, Tarki FE, Tavana S, Zali A, et al. Mortality risk factors among hospitalized COVID-19 patients in a major referral center in Iran. Tohoku J Exp Med 2020;252:73-84. [PubMed abstract]
    Sarvazad H, Cahngaripour SH, Eskandari Roozbahani N, Izadi B. Evaluation of electrolyte status of sodium, potassium and magnesium, and fasting blood sugar at the initial admission of individuals with COVID-19 without underlying disease in Golestan Hospital, Kermanshah. New Microbes New infect 2020;38:100807. [PubMed abstract]
    Quilliot D, Bonsack O, Jaussaud R, Mazur A. Dysmagnesemia in Covid-19 cohort patients: prevalence and associated factors. Magnes Res 2020;33:114-22. [PubMed abstract]
    Swaminathan R. Magnesium metabolism and its disorders. Clin Biochem Rev 2003;24:47-66. [PubMed abstract]
    Kroll MH, Elin RJ. Relationships between magnesium and protein concentrations in serum. Clin Chem 1985;31:244-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Ostojic SM, Milovancev A, Drid P, Nikolaidis A. Oxygen saturation improved with nitrate-based nutritional formula in patients with COVID-19. J Int Med Res 2021;49:3000605211012380. [PubMed abstract]
    Rostami S, Alavi SM, Daghagheleh R, Maraghi E, Hosseini SA. A randomized clinical trial investigating the impact of magnesium supplementation on clinical and biochemical measures in COVID-19 patients. Virol J 2024;21:91. [PubMed abstract]
    Dunn CJ, Goa KL. Risedronate: a review of its pharmacological properties and clinical use in resorptive bone disease. Drugs 2001;61:685-712. [PubMed abstract]
    Arayne MS, Sultana N, Hussain F. Interactions between ciprofloxacin and antacids--dissolution and adsorption studies. Drug Metab Drug Interact 2005;21:117-29. [PubMed abstract]
    Sarafidis PA, Georgianos PI, Lasaridis AN. Diuretics in clinical practice. Part II: electrolyte and acid-base disorders complicating diuretic therapy. Expert Opin Drug Saf 2010;9:259-73. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. FDA Drug Safety Communication: Low magnesium levels can be associated with long-term use of Proton Pump Inhibitor drugs (PPIs). 2011.
    Claustrat B, Leston J. Melatonin: Physiological effects in humans. Neurochirurgie 2015;61:77-84. [PubMed abstract]
    Habtemariam S, Daglia M, Sureda A, Selamoglu Z, Gulhan MF, Nabavi SM. Melatonin and respiratory diseases: a review. Curr Top Med Chem 2017;17:467-88. [PubMed abstract]
    Hadi A, Ghaedi E, Moradi S, Pourmasoumi M, Ghavami A, Kafeshani M. Effects of melatonin supplementation on blood pressure: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Horm Metab Res 2019;51:157-64. [PubMed abstract]
    Bahrampour Juybari K, Pourhanifeh MH, Hosseinzadeh A, Hemati K, Mehrzadi S. Melatonin potentials against viral infections including COVID-19: Current evidence and new findings. Virus Res 2020;287:198108. [PubMed abstract]
    Zhang R, Wang X, Ni L, Di X, Ma B, Niu S, et al. COVID-19: Melatonin as a potential adjuvant treatment. Life Sci 2020;250:117583. [PubMed abstract]
    Corrao S, Bocchio RM, Lo Monaco M, Natoli G, Cavezzi A, Troiani E, et al. Does evidence exist to blunt inflammatory response by nutraceutical supplementation during COVID-19 pandemic? An overview of systematic reviews of vitamin D, vitamin C, melatonin, and zinc. Nutrients 2021;13. [PubMed abstract]
    Raygan F, Ostadmohammadi V, Bahmani F, Reiter RJ, Asemi Z. Melatonin administration lowers biomarkers of oxidative stress and cardio-metabolic risk in type 2 diabetic patients with coronary heart disease: A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Clin Nutr 2019;38:191-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Zhou Y, Hou Y, Shen J, Mehra R, Kallianpur A, Culver DA, et al. A network medicine approach to investigation and population-based validation of disease manifestations and drug repurposing for COVID-19. PLoS Biol 2020;18:e3000970. [PubMed abstract]
    Chavarría AP, Vázquez RRV, Cherit JGD, Bello HH, Suastegui HC, Moreno-Castañeda L, et al. Antioxidants and pentoxifylline as coadjuvant measures to standard therapy to improve prognosis of patients with pneumonia by COVID-19. Comput Struct Biotechnol J 2021;19:1379-90. [PubMed abstract]
    Hasan ZT, Atrakji D, Mehuaiden DAK. The Effect of Melatonin on Thrombosis, Sepsis and Mortality Rate in COVID-19 Patients. Int J Infect Dis 2022;114:79-84. [PubMed abstract]
    Ameri A, Frouz Asadi M, Ziaei A, Vatankhah M, Safa O, et al. Efficacy and safety of oral melatonin in patients with severe COVID-19: a randomized controlled trial. Inflammopharmacology 2023;31:265-74. [PubMed abstract]
    Farnoosh G, Akbariqomi M, Badri T, Bagheri M, Izadi M, et al. Efficacy of a Low Dose of Melatonin as an Adjunctive Therapy in Hospitalized Patients with COVID-19: A Randomized, Double-blind Clinical Trial. Arch Med Res 2022;53:79-85. [PubMed abstract]
    Fogleman C, Cohen D, Mercier A, Farrell D, Rutz J, et al. A Pilot of a Randomized Control Trial of Melatonin and Vitamin C for Mild-to-Moderate COVID-19. J Am Board Fam Med 2022;35:695-707. [PubMed abstract]
    Mousavi SA, Heydari K, Mehravaran H, Saeedi M, Alizadeh-Navaei R, et al. Melatonin effects on sleep quality and outcomes of COVID-19 patients: An open-label, randomized, controlled trial. J Med Virol 2022;94:263-71. [PubMed abstract]
    Andersen LP, Gögenur I, Rosenberg J, Reiter RJ. The safety of melatonin in humans. Clin Drug Investig 2016;36:169-75. [PubMed abstract]
    Voordouw BC, Euser R, Verdonk RE, Alberda BT, de Jong FH, Drogendijk AC, et al. Melatonin and melatonin-progestin combinations alter pituitary-ovarian function in women and can inhibit ovulation. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1992;74:108-17. [PubMed abstract]
    Sheldon SH. Pro-convulsant effects of oral melatonin in neurologically disabled children. Lancet 1998;351:1254. [PubMed abstract]
    Wirtz PH, Spillmann M, Bärtschi C, Ehlert U, von Känel R. Oral melatonin reduces blood coagulation activity: a placebo-controlled study in healthy young men. J Pineal Res 2008;44:127-33. [PubMed abstract]
    Natural Medicines Comprehensive Database. Melatonin. 2021.
    Bauer SR, Kapoor A, Rath M, Thomas SA. What is the role of supplementation with ascorbic acid, zinc, vitamin D, or N-acetylcysteine for prevention or treatment of COVID-19? Cleve Clin J Med 2020. [PubMed abstract]
    De Flora S, Balansky R, La Maestra S. Rationale for the use of N-acetylcysteine in both prevention and adjuvant therapy of COVID-19. FASEB J 2020;34:13185-93. [PubMed abstract]
    Shi Z, Puyo CA. N-Acetylcysteine to combat COVID-19: An evidence review. Ther Clin Risk Manag 2020;16:1047-55. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. National Drug Code Directory. 2021.
    National Institutes of Health. Dietary Supplement Label Database. 2022.
    Wei J, Pang CS, Han J, Yan H. Effect of orally administered n-acetylcysteine on chronic bronchitis: A meta-analysis. Adv Ther 2019;36:3356-67. [PubMed abstract]
    Fowdar K, Chen H, He Z, Zhang J, Zhong X, Zhang J, et al. The effect of N-acetylcysteine on exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: A meta-analysis and systematic review. Heart Lung 2017;46:120-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Assimakopoulos SF, Aretha D, Komninos D, Dimitropoulou D, Lagadinou M, Leonidou L, et al. N-acetyl-cysteine reduces the risk for mechanical ventilation and mortality in patients with COVID-19 pneumonia: a two-center retrospective cohort study. Infect Dis 2021;53:847-54. [PubMed abstract]
    Eslami Ghayour A, Nazari S, Keramat F, Shahbazi F, Eslami-Ghayour A. Evaluation of the efficacy of N-acetylcysteine and bromhexine compared with standard care in preventing hospitalization of outpatients with COVID-19: a double blind randomized clinical trial. Rev Clin Esp (Barc) 2024;224:86-95. [PubMed abstract]
    de Alencar JCG, Moreira CL, Müller AD, Chaves CE, Fukuhara MA, da Silva EA, et al. Double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial with N-acetylcysteine for treatment of severe acute respiratory syndrome caused by coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). Clin Infect Dis 2021;72:e736-e41. [PubMed abstract]
    Taher A, Lashgari M, Sedighi L, Rahimi-Bashar F, Poorolajal J, et al. A pilot study on intravenous N-Acetylcysteine treatment in patients with mild-to-moderate COVID19-associated acute respiratory distress syndrome. Pharmacol Rep 2021;73:1650-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Natural Medicines Comprehensive Database. N-Acetyl Cysteine (NAC). 2021.
    Horowitz JD, Henry CA, Syrjanen ML, Louis WJ, Fish RD, Antman EM, et al. Nitroglycerine/N-acetylcysteine in the management of unstable angina pectoris. Eur Heart J 1988;9 Suppl A:95-100. [PubMed abstract]
    Ardissino D, Merlini PA, Savonitto S, Demicheli G, Zanini P, Bertocchi F, et al. Effect of transdermal nitroglycerin or N-acetylcysteine, or both, in the long-term treatment of unstable angina pectoris. J Am Coll Cardiol 1997;29:941-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Institute of Medicine. Food and Nutrition Board. Dietary reference intakes for energy, carbohydrate, fiber, fat, fatty acids, cholesterol, protein, and amino acids (macronutrients). Washington, DC National Academy Press; 2005.
    Jones PJH, Rideout T. Lipids, sterols, and their metabolies. In: Ross AC, Caballero B, Cousins RJ, Tucker KL, Ziegler TF, eds. Modern Nutrition in Health and Disease. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2014.
    Hathaway D, Pandav K, Patel M, Riva-Moscoso A, Singh BM, Patel A, et al. Omega 3 fatty acids and COVID-19: A comprehensive review. Infect Chemother 2020;52:478-95. [PubMed abstract]
    James M, Proudman S, Cleland L. Fish oil and rheumatoid arthritis: past, present and future. Proc Nutr Soc 2010;69:316-23. [PubMed abstract]
    Asher A, Tintle NL, Myers M, Lockshon L, Bacareza H, Harris WS. Blood omega-3 fatty acids and death from COVID-19: A pilot study. Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids 2021;166:102250. [PubMed abstract]
    Harris W. Omega-6 and omega-3 fatty acids: partners in prevention. Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care 2010;13:125-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Louca P, Murray B, Klaser K, Graham MS, Mazidi M, Leeming ER, et al. Modest effects of dietary supplements during the COVID-19 pandemic: insights from 445 850 users of the COVID-19 Symptom Study app. BMJ Nutr Prev Health 2021. [PubMed abstract]
    Harris WS, Tintle NL, Sathyanarayanan SP, Westra J. Association between blood N-3 fatty acid levels and the risk of coronavirus disease 2019 in the UK Biobank. Am J Clin Nutr 2023;117:357-63. [PubMed abstract]
    Doaei S, Gholami S, Rastgoo S, Gholamalizadeh M, Bourbour F, et al. The effect of omega-3 fatty acid supplementation on clinical and biochemical parameters of critically ill patients with COVID-19: a randomized clinical trial. J Transl Med 2021;19:128. [PubMed abstract]
    Brunvoll SH, Nygaard AB, Ellingjord-Dale M, Holland P, Istre MS, et al. Prevention of covid-19 and other acute respiratory infections with cod liver oil supplementation, a low dose vitamin D supplement: quadruple blinded, randomised placebo controlled trial. BMJ 2022;378:e071245. [PubMed abstract]
    European Food Safety Authority. Scientific opinion on the tolerable upper intake level of eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) and docosapentaenoic acid (DPA). EFSA Journal 2012;10:2815.
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Qualified Health Claims: Letters of Enforcement Discretion. 2019.
    Mazereeuw G, Lanctôt KL, Chau SA, Swardfager W, Herrmann N. Effects of ω-3 fatty acids on cognitive performance: a meta-analysis. Neurobiol Aging 2012;33:1482.e17-29 [PubMed abstract]
    Cabré E, Mañosa M, Gassull MA. Omega-3 fatty acids and inflammatory bowel diseases - a systematic review. The British journal of nutrition 2012;107 Suppl 2:S240-52. [PubMed abstract]
    Buckley MS, Goff AD, Knapp WE. Fish oil interaction with warfarin. Ann Pharmacother 2004;38:50-2. [PubMed abstract]
    GlaxoSmithKline. LOVAZA® (omega-3 acid ethyl esters) capsules, prescribing information. 2008.
    Appel LJ, Miller ER, 3rd, Seidler AJ, Whelton PK. Does supplementation of diet with 'fish oil' reduce blood pressure? A meta-analysis of controlled clinical trials. Arch Intern Med1993;153:1429-38. [PubMed abstract]
    Natural Medicines Comprehensive Database. Fish Oil. 2023.
    Hill C, Guarner F, Reid G, Gibson GR, Merenstein DJ, Pot B, et al. Expert consensus document. The International Scientific Association for Probiotics and Prebiotics consensus statement on the scope and appropriate use of the term probiotic. Nature reviews Gastroenterology & hepatology 2014;11:506-14. [PubMed abstract]
    World Gastroenterology Organisation. Probiotics and prebiotics. 2017.
    Milajerdi A, Mousavi SM, Sadeghi A, Salari-Moghaddam A, Parohan M, Larijani B, et al. The effect of probiotics on inflammatory biomarkers: a meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials. Eur J Nutr 2020;59:633-49. [PubMed abstract]
    Vignesh R, Swathirajan CR, Tun ZH, Rameshkumar MR, Solomon SS, Balakrishnan P. Could Perturbation of Gut Microbiota Possibly Exacerbate the Severity of COVID-19 via Cytokine Storm? Front Immunol 2020;11:607734. [PubMed abstract]
    Lehtoranta L, Pitkäranta A, Korpela R. Probiotics in respiratory virus infections. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 2014;33:1289-302. [PubMed abstract]
    Hao Q, Dong BR, Wu T. Probiotics for preventing acute upper respiratory tract infections. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2015:Cd006895. [PubMed abstract]
    Frei R, Akdis M, O'Mahony L. Prebiotics, probiotics, synbiotics, and the immune system: experimental data and clinical evidence. Curr Opin Gastroenterol 2015;31:153-8. [PubMed abstract]
    King S, Glanville J, Sanders ME, Fitzgerald A, Varley D. Effectiveness of probiotics on the duration of illness in healthy children and adults who develop common acute respiratory infectious conditions: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Br J Nutr 2014;112:41-54. [PubMed abstract]
    Liu S, Hu P, Du X, Zhou T, Pei X. Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG supplementation for preventing respiratory infections in children: a meta-analysis of randomized, placebo-controlled trials. Indian pediatrics 2013;50:377-81. [PubMed abstract]
    Laursen RP, Hojsak I. Probiotics for respiratory tract infections in children attending day care centers-a systematic review. Eur J Pediatr 2018;177:979-94. [PubMed abstract]
    Wang Y, Li X, Ge T, Xiao Y, Liao Y, Cui Y, et al. Probiotics for prevention and treatment of respiratory tract infections in children: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Medicine 2016;95:e4509. [PubMed abstract]
    Wischmeyer PE, Tang H, Ren Y, Bohannon L, Jiang D, et al. Efficacy of probiotic treatment as post-exposure prophylaxis for COVID-19: A double-blind, Placebo-Controlled Randomized trial. Clin Nutr 2024;43:259-67. [PubMed abstract]
    d'Ettorre G, Ceccarelli G, Marazzato M, Campagna G, Pinacchio C, Alessandri F, et al. Challenges in the management of SARS-CoV2 infection: The role of oral bacteriotherapy as complementary therapeutic strategy to avoid the progression of COVID-19. Front Med (Lausanne) 2020;7:389. [PubMed abstract]
    Gutiérrez-Castrellón P, Gandara-Martí T, Abreu YAAT, Nieto-Rufino CD, López-Orduña E, et al. Probiotic improves symptomatic and viral clearance in Covid19 outpatients: a randomized, quadruple-blinded, placebo-controlled trial. Gut Microbes 2022;14:2018899. [PubMed abstract]
    Zhu J, Pitre T, Ching C, Zeraatkar D, Gruchy S. Safety and efficacy of probiotic supplements as adjunctive therapies in patients with COVID-19: A systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS One 2023;18:e0278356. [PubMed abstract]
    Didari T, Solki S, Mozaffari S, Nikfar S, Abdollahi M. A systematic review of the safety of probiotics. Expert opinion on Drug Saf 2014;13:227-39. [PubMed abstract]
    Borriello SP, Hammes WP, Holzapfel W, Marteau P, Schrezenmeir J, Vaara M, et al. Safety of probiotics that contain lactobacilli or bifidobacteria. Clin Infect Dis 2003;36:775-80. [PubMed abstract]
    Lewis SJ, Freedman AR. Review article: the use of biotherapeutic agents in the prevention and treatment of gastrointestinal disease. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 1998;12:807-22. [PubMed abstract]
    Natural Medicines Comprehensive Database. Lactobacillus. 2021.
    Harwood M, Danielewska-Nikiel B, Borzelleca JF, Flamm GW, Williams GM, Lines TC. A critical review of the data related to the safety of quercetin and lack of evidence of in vivo toxicity, including lack of genotoxic/carcinogenic properties. Food Chem Toxicol 2007;45:2179-205. [PubMed abstract]
    Derosa G, Maffioli P, D'Angelo A, Di Pierro F. A role for quercetin in coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). Phytother Res 2021;35:1230-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Diniz LRL, Souza MTS, Duarte ABS, Sousa DP. Mechanistic aspects and therapeutic potential of quercetin against COVID-19-associated acute kidney injury. Molecules 2020;25: 5772. [PubMed abstract]
    F DIP, Khan A, Bertuccioli A, Maffioli P, Derosa G, Khan S, et al. Quercetin Phytosome® as a potential candidate for managing COVID-19. Minerva Gastroenterol (Torino) 2021;67:190-5. [PubMed abstract]
    Saakre M, Mathew D, Ravisankar V. Perspectives on plant flavonoid quercetin-based drugs for novel SARS-CoV-2. Beni-Suef Univ J Basic Appl Scie 2021;10:21. [PubMed abstract]
    Saeedi-Boroujeni A, Mahmoudian-Sani MR. Anti-inflammatory potential of Quercetin in COVID-19 treatment. J Inflamm (Lond) 2021;18:3. [PubMed abstract]
    Bastaminejad S, Bakhtiyari S. Quercetin and its relative therapeutic potential against COVID-19: A retrospective review and prospective overview. Curr Mol Med 2020. [PubMed abstract]
    Colunga Biancatelli RML, Berrill M, Catravas JD, Marik PE. Quercetin and vitamin C: an experimental, synergistic therapy for the prevention and treatment of SARS-CoV-2 related disease (COVID-19). Front immunol 2020;11:1451. [PubMed abstract]
    Heinz SA, Henson DA, Austin MD, Jin F, Nieman DC. Quercetin supplementation and upper respiratory tract infection: A randomized community clinical trial. Pharmacol Res 2010;62:237-42. [PubMed abstract]
    Aucoin M, Cooley K, Saunders PR, Cardozo V, Remy D, Cramer H, et al. The effect of quercetin on the prevention or treatment of COVID-19 and other respiratory tract infections in humans: A rapid review. Adv Integr Med 2020;7:247-51. [PubMed abstract]
    Di Pierro F, Khan A, Iqtadar S, Mumtaz SU, Chaudhry MNA, et al. Quercetin as a possible complementary agent for early-stage COVID-19: Concluding results of a randomized clinical trial. Front Pharmacol 2022;13:1096853. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. GRN No. 341, Quercetin. 2010.
    Andres S, Pevny S, Ziegenhagen R, Bakhiya N, Schäfer B, Hirsch-Ernst KI, et al. Safety Aspects of the Use of Quercetin as a Dietary Supplement. Mol Nutr Food Res 2018;62. [PubMed abstract]
    Edwards RL, Lyon T, Litwin SE, Rabovsky A, Symons JD, Jalili T. Quercetin reduces blood pressure in hypertensive subjects. TJ Nutr 2007;137:2405-11. [PubMed abstract]
    Institute of Medicine. Food and Nutrition Board. Dietary Reference Intakes for Vitamin C, Vitamin E, Selenium, and Carotenoids Washington, DC: National Academy Press; 2000.
    Akhtar S, Das JK, Ismail T, Wahid M, Saeed W, Bhutta ZA. Nutritional perspectives for the prevention and mitigation of COVID-19. Nutr Rev 2021;79:289-300. [PubMed abstract]
    Zhang J, Saad R, Taylor EW, Rayman MP. Selenium and selenoproteins in viral infection with potential relevance to COVID-19. Redox Biol 2020;37:101715. [PubMed abstract]
    Calder PC. Nutrition, immunity and COVID-19. BMJ Nutr Prev Health 2020;3:74-92. [PubMed abstract]
    Allingstrup M, Afshari A. Selenium supplementation for critically ill adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2015;2015:Cd003703. [PubMed abstract]
    Bermano G, Méplan C, Mercer DK, Hesketh JE. Selenium and viral infection: are there lessons for COVID-19? The Br J Nutr 2021;125:618-27. [PubMed abstract]
    Bae M, Kim H. Mini-Review on the Roles of Vitamin C, Vitamin D, and Selenium in the Immune System against COVID-19. Molecules 2020;25: 5346. [PubMed abstract]
    Alexander J, Tinkov A, Strand TA, Alehagen U, Skalny A, Aaseth J. Early nutritional interventions with zinc, selenium and vitamin D for raising anti-viral resistance against progressive COVID-19. Nutrients 2020;12. [PubMed abstract]
    Guillin OM, Vindry C, Ohlmann T, Chavatte L. Selenium, Selenoproteins and Viral Infection. Nutrients 2019;11. [PubMed abstract]
    Broome CS, McArdle F, Kyle JA, Andrews F, Lowe NM, et al. An increase in selenium intake improves immune function and poliovirus handling in adults with marginal selenium status. Am J Clin Nutr 2004;80:154-62. [PubMed abstract]
    Zhang J, Taylor EW, Bennett K, Saad R, Rayman MP. Association between regional selenium status and reported outcome of COVID-19 cases in China. Am J clin Nutr 2020;111:1297-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Notz Q, Herrmann J, Schlesinger T, Helmer P, Sudowe S, Sun Q, et al. Clinical Significance of Micronutrient Supplementation in Critically Ill COVID-19 Patients with Severe ARDS. Nutrients 2021;13. [PubMed abstract]
    Moghaddam A, Heller RA, Sun Q, Seelig J, Cherkezov A, Seibert L, et al. Selenium Deficiency Is Associated with Mortality Risk from COVID-19. Nutrients 2020;12. [PubMed abstract]
    Im JH, Je YS, Baek J, Chung MH, Kwon HY Lee JS. Nutritional status of patients with COVID-19. Int J Infect Dis 2020;100:390-3. [PubMed abstract]
    Sunde RA. Selenium. In: Coates PM, Betz JM, Blackman MR, eds. Encyclopedia of Dietary Supplements 2nd ed. London and New York: Informa Healthcare; 2010:711-8.
    Hong LK, Diamond AM. Selenium In: Marriott BP, Birt DF, Stallings VA, Yates AA, eds. Present Knowledge in Nutrition Cambridge, MA: Elsevier; 2020:443-56.
    Vernie LN, de Goeij JJ, Zegers C, de Vries M, Baldew GS, McVie JG. Cisplatin-induced changes of selenium levels and glutathione peroxidase activities in blood of testis tumor patients. Cancer Lett 1988;40:83-91. [PubMed abstract]
    Sieja K, Talerczyk M. Selenium as an element in the treatment of ovarian cancer in women receiving chemotherapy. Gynecol Oncol 2004;93:320-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Holford P, Carr AC, Jovic TH, Ali SR, Whitaker IS, et al. Vitamin C-An Adjunctive Therapy for Respiratory Infection, Sepsis and COVID-19. Nutrients 2020;12. [PubMed abstract]
    Carr AC, Maggini S. Vitamin C and immune function. Nutrients 2017;9. [PubMed abstract]
    Jacob RA, Sotoudeh G. Vitamin C function and status in chronic disease. Nutr Clin CareNutr Clin Care 2002;5:66-74. [PubMed abstract]
    Hemilä H, Chalker E. Vitamin C for preventing and treating the common cold. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2013:Cd000980. [PubMed abstract]
    Johnston CS. Vitamin C. In: Marriott BP, Birt DF, Stallings VA, Yates AA, eds. Present Knowledge in Nutrition 11th ed. Cambridge, MA: Elsevier; 2020:155-69.
    Hemilä H. Vitamin C and Infections. Nutrients 2017;9. [PubMed abstract]
    Schleicher RL, Carroll MD, Ford ES, Lacher DA. Serum vitamin C and the prevalence of vitamin C deficiency in the United States: 2003-2004 National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES). Am J Clin Nutr 2009;90:1252-63. [PubMed abstract]
    Hemilä H, Louhiala P. Vitamin C for preventing and treating pneumonia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2013:Cd005532. [PubMed abstract]
    Milani GP, Macchi M, Guz-Mark A. Vitamin C in the treatment of COVID-19. Nutrients 2021;13:1172. [PubMed abstract]
    Capone S, Abramyan S, Ross B, Rosenberg J, Zeibeq J, et al. Characterization of Critically Ill COVID-19 Patients at a Brooklyn Safety-Net Hospital. Cureus 2020;12:e9809 [PubMed abstract]
    Krishnan S, Patel K, Desai R, Sule A, Paik P, Miller A, et al. Clinical comorbidities, characteristics, and outcomes of mechanically ventilated patients in the State of Michigan with SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia. J Clin Anesth2020;67:110005. [PubMed abstract]
    Thomas S, Patel D, Bittel B, Wolski K, Wang Q, Kumar A, et al. Effect of high-dose zinc and ascorbic acid supplementation vs usual care on symptom length and reduction among ambulatory patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection: The COVID A to Z randomized clinical trial. JAMA Netw Open 2021;4:e210369. [PubMed abstract]
    Padayatty SJ, Riordan HD, Hewitt SM, Katz A, Hoffer LJ, Levine M. Intravenously administered vitamin C as cancer therapy: three cases. CMAJ 2006;174:937-42. [PubMed abstract]
    Cheng RZ. Can early and high intravenous dose of vitamin C prevent and treat coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)? Med Drug Discov 2020;5:100028. [PubMed abstract]
    Adhikari NKJ, Hashmi M, Tirupakuzhi Vijayaraghavan BK, Haniffa R, Beane A, et al. Intravenous Vitamin C for Patients Hospitalized With COVID-19: Two Harmonized Randomized Clinical Trials. JAMA 2023;330:1745-59. [PubMed abstract]
    Zhang J, Rao X, Li Y, Zhu Y, Liu F, et al. Pilot trial of high-dose vitamin C in critically ill COVID-19 patients. Ann Intensive Care 2021;11:5. [PubMed abstract]
    Kumari P, Dembra S, Dembra P, Bhawna F, Gul A, et al. The Role of Vitamin C as Adjuvant Therapy in COVID-19. Cureus 2020;12:e11779. [PubMed abstract]
    JamaliMoghadamSiahkali S, Zarezade B, Koolaji S, SeyedAlinaghi S, Zendehdel A, et al. Safety and effectiveness of high-dose vitamin C in patients with COVID-19: a randomized open-label clinical trial. Eur J Med Res 2021;26:20. [PubMed abstract]
    Coppock D, Violet PC, Vasquez G, Belden K, Foster M, et al. Pharmacologic Ascorbic Acid as Early Therapy for Hospitalized Patients with COVID-19: A Randomized Clinical Trial. Life (Basel) 2022;12. [PubMed abstract]
    Cho J, Ahn S, Yim J, Cheon Y, Jeong SH, et al. Influence of Vitamin C and Maltose on the Accuracy of Three Models of Glucose Meters. Ann Lab Med 2016;36:271-4. [PubMed abstract]
    Lv H, Zhang GJ, Kang XX, Yuan H, Lv YW, Wang WW, et al. Factors interfering with the accuracy of five blood glucose meters used in Chinese hospitals. J Clin Lab Anal 2013;27:354-66. [PubMed abstract]
    Tang Z, Du X, Louie RF, Kost GJ. Effects of drugs on glucose measurements with handheld glucose meters and a portable glucose analyzer. Am J Clin Pathol 2000;113:75-86. [PubMed abstract]
    Lawenda BD, Kelly KM, Ladas EJ, Sagar SM, Vickers A, Blumberg JB. Should supplemental antioxidant administration be avoided during chemotherapy and radiation therapy? J Natl Cancer Inst 2008;100:773-83. [PubMed abstract]
    Institute of Medicine. Food and Nutrition Board. Dietary Reference Intakes for Calcium and Vitamin D. Washington, DC: National Academy Press; 2010.
    Iddir M, Brito A, Dingeo G, Fernandez Del Campo SS, Samouda H, et al. Strengthening the Immune System and Reducing Inflammation and Oxidative Stress through Diet and Nutrition: Considerations during the COVID-19 Crisis. Nutrients 2020;12. [PubMed abstract]
    Zabetakis I, Lordan R, Norton C, Tsoupras A. COVID-19: The Inflammation Link and the Role of Nutrition in Potential Mitigation. Nutrients 2020;12. [PubMed abstract]
    Fakhoury HMA, Kvietys PR, Shakir I, Shams H, Grant WB, Alkattan K. Lung-Centric Inflammation of COVID-19: Potential Modulation by Vitamin D. Nutrients 2021;13. [PubMed abstract]
    Gruber-Bzura BM. Vitamin D and Influenza-Prevention or Therapy? Int J Mol Sci 2018;19. [PubMed abstract]
    Arboleda JF, Urcuqui-Inchima S. Vitamin D Supplementation: A Potential Approach for Coronavirus/COVID-19 Therapeutics? Front Immunol 2020;11:1523. [PubMed abstract]
    Grant WB, Lahore H, McDonnell SL, Baggerly CA, French CB, et al. Evidence that Vitamin D Supplementation Could Reduce Risk of Influenza and COVID-19 Infections and Deaths. Nutrients 2020;12. [PubMed abstract]
    Rubin R. Sorting out whether vitamin d deficiency raises COVID-19 risk. JAMA 2021. [PubMed abstract]
    Barazzoni R, Bischoff SC, Breda J, Wickramasinghe K, Krznaric Z, Nitzan D, et al. ESPEN expert statements and practical guidance for nutritional management of individuals with SARS-CoV-2 infection. Clin Nutr 2020;39:1631-8. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Department of Agriculture ARS. Percent reporting and mean amounts of selected vitamins and minerals food and beverages and dietary supplements by gender and age, in the United States, 2015-2016. What We Eat in America, NHANES 2015-2016, 2019.
    Herrick KA, Storandt RJ, Afful J, Pfeiffer CM, Schleicher RL, Gahche JJ, et al. Vitamin D status in the United States, 2011-2014. Am J Clin Nutr 2019;110:150-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Martineau AR, Jolliffe DA, Hooper RL, Greenberg L, Aloia JF, Bergman P, et al. Vitamin D supplementation to prevent acute respiratory tract infections: systematic review and meta-analysis of individual participant data. BMJ 2017;356:i6583. [PubMed abstract]
    Herrera-Quintana L, Gamarra-Morales Y, Vázquez-Lorente H, Molina-López J, Castaño-Pérez J, Machado-Casas JF, et al. Bad Prognosis in Critical Ill Patients with COVID-19 during Short-Term ICU Stay regarding Vitamin D Levels. Nutrients 2021;13. [PubMed abstract]
    Luo X, Liao Q, Shen Y, Li H, Cheng L. Vitamin D deficiency is associated with COVID-19 incidence and disease severity in Chinese people [corrected]. J Nutr 2021;151:98-103. [PubMed abstract]
    Hernández JL, Nan D, Fernandez-Ayala M, García-Unzueta M, Hernández-Hernández MA, López-Hoyos M, et al. Vitamin D status in hospitalized patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2021;106:e1343-e53. [PubMed abstract]
    Bennouar S, Cherif AB, Kessira A, Bennouar DE, Abdi S. Vitamin D deficiency and low serum calcium as predictors of poor prognosis in patients with severe COVID-19. J Am Coll Nutr 2021;40:104-10. [PubMed abstract]
    Sulli A, Gotelli E, Casabella A, Paolino S, Pizzorni C, Alessandri E, et al. Vitamin D and lung outcomes in elderly COVID-19 patients. Nutrients 2021;13. [PubMed abstract]
    AlSafar H, Grant WB, Hijazi R, Uddin M, Alkaabi N, et al. COVID-19 Disease Severity and Death in Relation to Vitamin D Status among SARS-CoV-2-Positive UAE Residents. Nutrients 2021;13. [PubMed abstract]
    Bychinin MV, Klypa TV, Mandel IA, Andreichenko SA, Baklaushev VP, et al. Low Circulating Vitamin D in Intensive Care Unit-Admitted COVID-19 Patients as a Predictor of Negative Outcomes. J Nutr 2021. [PubMed abstract]
    Karahan S, Katkat F. Impact of Serum 25(OH) Vitamin D Level on Mortality in Patients with COVID-19 in Turkey. J Nutr Health Aging 2021;25:189-96. [PubMed abstract]
    D'Avolio A, Avataneo V, Manca A, Cusato J, De Nicolò A, et al. 25-Hydroxyvitamin D Concentrations Are Lower in Patients with Positive PCR for SARS-CoV-2. Nutrients 2020;12. [PubMed abstract]
    Zelzer S, Prüller F, Curcic P, Sloup Z, Holter M, et al. Vitamin D Metabolites and Clinical Outcome in Hospitalized COVID-19 Patients. Nutrients 2021;13. [PubMed abstract]
    Butler-Laporte G, Nakanishi T, Mooser V, Morrison DR, Abdullah T, et al. Vitamin D and COVID-19 susceptibility and severity in the COVID-19 Host Genetics Initiative: A Mendelian randomization study. PLoS Med 2021;18:e1003605. [PubMed abstract]
    Li Y, Tong CH, Bare LA Devlin JJ. Assessment of the association of vitamin D level with SARS-CoV-2 seropositivity among working-age adults. JAMA Netw Open 2021;4:e2111634. [PubMed abstract]
    Reis BZ, Fernandes AL, Sales LP, Santos MD, Dos Santos CC, et al. Influence of vitamin D status on hospital length of stay and prognosis in hospitalized patients with moderate to severe COVID-19: a multicenter prospective cohort study. Am J Clin Nutr 2021.  [PubMed abstract]
    Hastie CE, Mackay DF, Ho F, Celis-Morales CA, Katikireddi SV, Niedzwiedz CL, et al. Vitamin D concentrations and COVID-19 infection in UK Biobank. Diabetes Metab Syndr 2020;14:561-5. [PubMed abstract]
    Bassatne A, Basbous M, Chakhtoura M, El Zein O, Rahme M El-Hajj Fuleihan G. The link between COVID-19 and VItamin D (VIVID): A systematic review and meta-analysis. Metabolism 2021;119:154753. [PubMed abstract]
    Meltzer DO, Best TJ, Zhang H, Vokes T, Arora V, Solway J. Association of vitamin D status and other clinical characteristics with COVID-19 test results. JAMA Netw Open2020;3:e2019722. [PubMed abstract]
    Kaufman HW, Niles JK, Kroll MH, Bi C, Holick MF. SARS-CoV-2 positivity rates associated with circulating 25-hydroxyvitamin D levels. PLoS One 2020;15:e0239252. [PubMed abstract]
    Baktash V, Hosack T, Patel N, Shah S, Kandiah P, et al. Vitamin D status and outcomes for hospitalised older patients with COVID-19. Postgrad Med J 2020. [PubMed abstract]
    Carpagnano GE, Di Lecce V, Quaranta VN, Zito A, Buonamico E, et al. (2021). Vitamin D deficiency as a predictor of poor prognosis in patients with acute respiratory failure due to COVID-19. J Endocrinol Invest 2021;44:765-71. [PubMed abstract]
    Merzon E, Tworowski D, Gorohovski A, Vinker S, Golan Cohen A, Green I, et al. Low plasma 25(OH) vitamin D level is associated with increased risk of COVID-19 infection: an Israeli population-based study. FEBS J 2020;287:3693-702. [PubMed abstract]
    Ma H, Zhou T, Heianza Y, Qi L. Habitual use of vitamin D supplements and risk of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) infection: a prospective study in UK Biobank. American J Clin Nutr 2021. [PubMed abstract]
    Meltzer DO, Best TJ, Zhang H, Vokes T, Arora VM, Solway J. Association of vitamin D levels, race/ethnicity, and clinical characteristics with COVID-19 test results. JAMA Netw Open 2021;4:e214117. [PubMed abstract]
    Kompaniyets L, Goodman AB, Belay B, Freedman DS, Sucosky MS, Lange SJ, et al. Body mass index and risk for COVID-19-related hospitalization, intensive care unit admission, invasive mechanical ventilation, and death - United States, March-December 2020. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2021;70:355-61. [PubMed abstract]
    Wang Z, Joshi A, Leopold K, Jackson S, Christensen S, et al. Association of vitamin D deficiency with COVID-19 infection severity: Systematic review and meta-analysis. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 2022;96:281-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Drame M, Cofais C, Hentzien M, Proye E, Coulibaly PS, Demoustier-Tampere D, et al. Relation between Vitamin D and COVID-19 in Aged People: A Systematic Review. Nutrients 2021;13. [PubMed abstract]
    Yisak H, Ewunetei A, Kefale B, Mamuye M, Teshome F, Ambaw B, et al. Effects of Vitamin D on COVID-19 Infection and Prognosis: A Systematic Review. Risk Manag Healthc Policy 2021;14:31-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Pereira M, Dantas Damascena A, Galvão Azevedo LM, de Almeida Oliveira T, da Mota Santana J. Vitamin D deficiency aggravates COVID-19: systematic review and meta-analysis. Crit Rev Food Sci NutrCrit Rev Food Sci Nutr 2020:1-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Annweiler G, Corvaisier M, Gautier J, Dubée V, Legrand E, Sacco G, et al. Vitamin D supplementation associated to better survival in hospitalized frail elderly COVID-19 patients: The GERIA-COVID Quasi-Experimental Study. Nutrients 2020;12. [PubMed abstract]
    Alcala-Diaz JF, Limia-Perez L, Gomez-Huelgas R, Martin-Escalante MD, Cortes-Rodriguez B, et al. Calcifediol Treatment and Hospital Mortality Due to COVID-19: A Cohort Study. Nutrients 2021;13. [PubMed abstract]
    Ling SF, Broad E, Murphy R, Pappachan JM, Pardesi-Newton S, Kong MF, et al. High-Dose Cholecalciferol Booster Therapy is Associated with a Reduced Risk of Mortality in Patients with COVID-19: A Cross-Sectional Multi-Centre Observational Study. Nutrients 2020;12. [PubMed abstract]
    Villasis-Keever MA, Lopez-Alarcon MG, Miranda-Novales G, Zurita-Cruz JN, Barrada-Vazquez AS, et al. Efficacy and Safety of Vitamin D Supplementation to Prevent COVID-19 in Frontline Healthcare Workers. A Randomized Clinical Trial. Arch Med Res 2022;53:423-30. [PubMed abstract]
    Murai IH, Fernandes AL, Sales LP, Pinto AJ, Goessler KF, et al. Effect of a Single High Dose of Vitamin D3 on Hospital Length of Stay in Patients With Moderate to Severe COVID-19, A Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA 2021;325:1053-60. [PubMed abstract]
    Annweiler C, Beaudenon M, Gautier J, Gonsard J, Boucher S, et al. High-dose versus standard-dose vitamin D supplementation in older adults with COVID-19 (COVIT-TRIAL): A multicenter, open-label, randomized controlled superiority trial. PLoS Med 2022;19:e1003999. [PubMed abstract]
    Mariani J, Antonietti L, Tajer C, Ferder L, Inserra F, et al. High-dose vitamin D versus placebo to prevent complications in COVID-19 patients: Multicentre randomized controlled clinical trial. PLoS One 2022;17:e0267918. [PubMed abstract]
    Sabico S, Enani MA, Sheshah E, Aljohani NJ, Aldisi DA, Alotaibi NH, et al. Effects of a 2-Week 5000 IU versus 1000 IU Vitamin D3 Supplementation on Recovery of Symptoms in Patients with Mild to Moderate Covid-19: A Randomized Clinical Trial. Nutrients 2021;13. [PubMed abstract]
    Wang R, DeGruttola V, Lei Q, Mayer KH, Redline S, et al. The vitamin D for COVID-19 (VIVID) trial: A pragmatic cluster-randomized design. Contemp Clin Trials 2021;100:106176. [PubMed abstract]
    Galior K, Grebe S, Singh R. Development of vitamin D toxicity from overcorrection of vitamin D deficiency: A review of case reports. Nutrients 2018;10. [PubMed abstract]
    Auguste BL, Avila-Casado C, Bargman JM. Use of vitamin D drops leading to kidney failure in a 54-year-old man. CMAJ 2019;191:E390-e4. [PubMed abstract]
    Vogiatzi MG, Jacobson-Dickman E, DeBoer MD. Vitamin D supplementation and risk of toxicity in pediatrics: a review of current literature. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2014;99:1132-41. [PubMed abstract]
    Robien K, Oppeneer SJ, Kelly JA, Hamilton-Reeves JM. Drug-vitamin D interactions: a systematic review of the literature. Nutr Clin Pract 2013;28:194-208. [PubMed abstract]
    Buckley LM, Leib ES, Cartularo KS, Vacek PM, Cooper SM. Calcium and vitamin D3 supplementation prevents bone loss in the spine secondary to low-dose corticosteroids in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Ann Int Med 1996;125:961-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Lee GY, Han SN. The Role of Vitamin E in Immunity. Nutrients 2018;10. [PubMed abstract]
    James PT, Ali Z, Armitage AE, Bonell A, Cerami C, Drakesmith H, et al. The Role of Nutrition in COVID-19 Susceptibility and Severity of Disease: A Systematic Review. J Nutr 2021;151:1854-78. [PubMed abstract]
    Fiorino S, Gallo C, Zippi M, Sabbatani S, Manfredi R, Moretti R, et al. Cytokine storm in aged people with CoV-2: possible role of vitamins as therapy or preventive strategy. Aging Clin Exp Res 2020;32:2115-31. [PubMed abstract]
    Jayawardena R, Sooriyaarachchi P, Chourdakis M, Jeewandara C, Ranasinghe P. Enhancing immunity in viral infections, with special emphasis on COVID-19: A review. Diabetes Metab Syndr 2020;14:367-82. [PubMed abstract]
    Meydani SN, Barklund MP, Liu S, Meydani M, Miller RA, Cannon JG, et al. Vitamin E supplementation enhances cell-mediated immunity in healthy elderly subjects. Am J Clin Nutr 1990;52:557-63. [PubMed abstract]
    Meydani SN, Meydani M, Blumberg JB, Leka LS, Siber G, Loszewski R, et al. Vitamin E supplementation and in vivo immune response in healthy elderly subjects. A randomized controlled trial. JAMA 1997;277:1380-6. [PubMed abstract]
    De la Fuente M, Hernanz A, Guayerbas N, Victor VM, Arnalich F. Vitamin E ingestion improves several immune functions in elderly men and women. Free Radic Res 2008;42:272-80. [PubMed abstract]
    Rozga M, Cheng FW, Moloney L, Handu D. Effects of Micronutrients or Conditional Amino Acids on COVID-19-Related Outcomes: An Evidence Analysis Center Scoping Review. J Acad Nutr Diet 2021;121:1354-63. [PubMed abstract]
    Meydani SN, Leka LS, Fine BC, Dallal GE, Keusch GT, Singh MF, et al. Vitamin E and respiratory tract infections in elderly nursing home residents: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2004;292:828-36. [PubMed abstract]
    Hemilä H. Vitamin E administration may decrease the incidence of pneumonia in elderly males. Clin Interv Aging 2016;11:1379-85. [PubMed abstract]
    Graat JM, Schouten EG, Kok FJ. Effect of daily vitamin E and multivitamin-mineral supplementation on acute respiratory tract infections in elderly persons: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2002;288:715-21. [PubMed abstract]
    Doyle C, Kushi LH, Byers T, Courneya KS, Demark-Wahnefried W, Grant B, et al. Nutrition and physical activity during and after cancer treatment: an American Cancer Society guide for informed choices. CA Cancer J Clin 2006;56:323-53. [PubMed abstract]
    Natural Medicines Comprehensive Database. Vitamin E. 2021.
    Institute of Medicine. Food and Nutrition Board. Dietary Reference Intakes for Vitamin A, Vitamin K, Arsenic, Boron, Chromium, Copper, Iodine, Iron, Manganese, Molybdenum, Nickel, Silicon, Vanadium, and Zinc Washington, DC: National Academy Press; 2001.
    Prasad AS. Lessons learned from experimental human model of zinc deficiency. J Immunol Res 2020;2020:9207279. [PubMed abstract]
    Lazzerini M. Oral zinc provision in acute diarrhea. Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care 2016;19:239-43. [PubMed abstract]
    Wessels I, Maywald M, Rink L. Zinc as a gatekeeper of immune function. Nutrients 2017;9. [PubMed abstract]
    Wessels I, Rolles B, Rink L. The potential impact of zinc supplementation on COVID-19 pathogenesis. Front Immunol 2020;11:1712. [PubMed abstract]
    Read SA, Obeid S, Ahlenstiel C, Ahlenstiel G. The role of zinc in antiviral immunity. Adv Nutr 2019;10:696-710. [PubMed abstract]
    Prasad AS. Zinc: an overview. Nutrition 1995;11:93-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Wintergerst ES, Maggini S, Hornig DH. Contribution of selected vitamins and trace elements to immune function. Ann Nutr Metab 2007;51:301-23. [PubMed abstract]
    Meydani SN, Barnett JB, Dallal GE, Fine BC, Jacques PF, Leka LS, et al. Serum zinc and pneumonia in nursing home elderly. Am J Clin Nutr 2007;86:1167-73. [PubMed abstract]
    Barnett JB, Hamer DH, Meydani SN. Low zinc status: a new risk factor for pneumonia in the elderly? Nutr Rev 2010;68:30-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Reider CA, Chung RY, Devarshi PP, Grant RW, Hazels Mitmesser S. Inadequacy of immune health nutrients: Intakes in US adults, the 2005-2016 NHANES. Nutrients 2020;12. [PubMed abstract]
    Hemilä H. Zinc lozenges and the common cold: a meta-analysis comparing zinc acetate and zinc gluconate, and the role of zinc dosage. JRSM Open 2017;8:2054270417694291. [PubMed abstract]
    Vogel-González M, Talló-Parra M, Herrera-Fernández V, Pérez-Vilaró G, Chillón M, et al. Low Zinc Levels at Admission Associates with Poor Clinical Outcomes in SARS-CoV-2 Infection. Nutrients 2021;13. [PubMed abstract]
    Jothimani D, Kailasam E, Danielraj S, Nallathambi B, Ramachandran H, et al. COVID-19: Poor outcomes in patients with zinc deficiency. Int J Infect Dis 2020;100:343-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Heller RA, Sun Q, Hackler J, Seelig J, Seibert L, Cherkezov A, et al. Prediction of survival odds in COVID-19 by zinc, age and selenoprotein P as composite biomarker. Redox Biol 2021;38:101764. [PubMed abstract]
    Ryu M, Aydemir TB. Zinc. In: Marriott BP, Birt DF, Stallings VA, Yates AA, eds. Present Knowledge in Nutrition Cambridge, MA: Elsevier; 2020:393-408.
    Finzi E. Treatment of SARS-CoV-2 with high dose oral zinc salts: A report on four patients. Int J Infect Dis 2020;99:307-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Yao JS, Paguio JA, Dee EC, Tan HC, Moulick A, et al. The Minimal Effect of Zinc on the Survival of Hospitalized Patients With COVID-19: An Observational Study. Chest 2021;159:108-11. [PubMed abstract]
    Ben Abdallah S, Mhalla Y, Trabelsi I, Sekma A, Youssef R, et al. Twice-Daily Oral Zinc in the Treatment of Patients With Coronavirus Disease 2019: A Randomized Double-Blind Controlled Trial. Clin Infect Dis 2023;76:185-91. [PubMed abstract]
    Swindells S, Eschenauer GA, Nason M, Daar ES. Zinc and Coronavirus Disease 2019. Clin Infect Dis 2023;77:662. [PubMed abstract]
    Haj Ali KB, Sekma A, Trabelsi I, Belguith A, Razgallah R, et al. Reply to Swindells et al. Clin Infect Dis 2023;77:662-3. [PubMed abstract]
    Hooper PL, Visconti L, Garry PJ, Johnson GE. Zinc lowers high-density lipoprotein-cholesterol levels. JAMA 1980;244:1960-1. [PubMed abstract]
    Florez ID, Veroniki AA, Al Khalifah R, Yepes-Nuñez JJ, Sierra JM, Vernooij RWM, et al. Comparative effectiveness and safety of interventions for acute diarrhea and gastroenteritis in children: A systematic review and network meta-analysis. PLoS One 2018;13:e0207701. [PubMed abstract]
    Lazzerini M, Wanzira H. Oral zinc for treating diarrhoea in children. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2016;12:Cd005436. [PubMed abstract]
    Penttilä O, Hurme H, Neuvonen PJ. Effect of zinc sulphate on the absorption of tetracycline and doxycycline in man. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 1975;9:131-4. [PubMed abstract]
    Brewer GJ, Yuzbasiyan-Gurkan V, Johnson V, Dick RD, Wang Y. Treatment of Wilson's disease with zinc: XI. Interaction with other anticopper agents. J Am coll Nutr 1993;12:26-30. [PubMed abstract]
    Wester PO. Urinary zinc excretion during treatment with different diuretics. Acta Med Scand 1980;208:209-12. [PubMed abstract]
    Lomaestro BM, Bailie GR. Absorption interactions with fluoroquinolones. 1995 update. Drug Saf 1995;12:314-33. [PubMed abstract]

Disclaimer

This fact sheet by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Office of Dietary Supplements (ODS) provides information that should not take the place of medical advice. We encourage you to talk to your health care providers (doctor, registered dietitian, pharmacist, etc.) about your interest in, questions about, or use of dietary supplements and what may be best for your overall health. Any mention in this publication of a specific product or service, or recommendation from an organization or professional society, does not represent an endorsement by ODS of that product, service, or expert advice.

Updated: September 20, 2024

 Fluoride: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals (original version)
Fluoride: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals
Table of Contents

    Introduction
    Recommended Intakes
    Sources of Fluoride
    Fluoride Intakes and Status
    Fluoride and Health
    Health Risks from Excessive Fluoride
    Interactions with Fluoride
    Fluoride and Healthful Diets
    References
    Disclaimer

Introduction

Fluoride, a mineral, is naturally present in many foods and available as a dietary supplement. Fluoride is the ionic form of the element fluorine, and it inhibits or reverses the initiation and progression of dental caries (tooth decay) and stimulates new bone formation [1].

Soil, water, plants, and foods contain trace amounts of fluoride. Most of the fluoride that people consume comes from fluoridated water, foods and beverages prepared with fluoridated water, and toothpaste and other dental products containing fluoride [2,3].

Approximately 80% or more of orally ingested fluoride is absorbed in the gastrointestinal tract [1]. In adults, about 50% of absorbed fluoride is retained in the body, with all but 1% stored in bones and teeth [1,3]. The other 50% is excreted in urine [1]. In young children, up to 80% of absorbed fluoride is retained because more is taken up by bones and teeth than in adults [1].

Individual fluoride status is not typically assessed, although fluoride concentrations can be measured in plasma, saliva, urine, bones, nails, hair, and teeth [4,5]. Criteria for adequate, high, or low levels of fluoride in the body have not been established.
Recommended Intakes

Intake recommendations for fluoride and other nutrients are provided in the Dietary Reference Intakes (DRIs) developed by the Food and Nutrition Board (FNB) at the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine [1]. DRI is the general term for a set of reference values used for planning and assessing nutrient intakes of healthy people. These values, which vary by age and sex, include the following:

    Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA): Average daily level of intake sufficient to meet the nutrient requirements of nearly all (97%–98%) healthy individuals; often used to plan nutritionally adequate diets for individuals
    Adequate Intake (AI): Intake at this level is assumed to ensure nutritional adequacy; established when evidence is insufficient to develop an RDA
    Estimated Average Requirement (EAR): Average daily level of intake estimated to meet the requirements of 50% of healthy individuals; usually used to assess the nutrient intakes of groups of people and to plan nutritionally adequate diets for them; can also be used to assess the nutrient intakes of individuals
    Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL): Maximum daily intake unlikely to cause adverse health effects

The FNB found the data insufficient to derive EARs for fluoride. Therefore, the board established AIs for all ages using estimated intakes shown to maximize reductions in the incidence of dental caries without unwanted side effects, such as dental fluorosis, a chronic condition resulting from the consumption of too much fluoride when teeth are developing [1]. Table 1 lists the current AIs for fluoride for healthy individuals.
Table 1: Daily Adequate Intakes (AIs) for Fluoride [1] Age 	Male 	Female 	Pregnancy 	Lactation
Birth to 6 months 	0.01 mg 	0.01 mg 		
7–12 months 	0.5 mg 	0.5 mg 		
1–3 years 	0.7 mg 	0.7 mg 		
4–8 years 	1 mg 	1 mg 		
9–13 years 	2 mg 	2 mg 		
14–18 years 	3 mg 	3 mg 	3 mg 	3 mg
19+ years 	4 mg 	3 mg 	3 mg 	3 mg
 
Sources of Fluoride
Food

Brewed tea typically contains higher levels of fluoride than most foods, depending on the type of tea and its source, because tea plants take up fluoride from soil [1,3]. Fluoride levels can range from 0.3 to 6.5 mg/L (0.07 to 1.5 mg/cup) in brewed tea made with distilled water [3].

Fluoride concentrations in breast milk are so low that they cannot always be detected; when these levels can be measured, they range from less than 0.002 to 0.01 mg/L, even when mothers live in communities with fluoridated water [3]. Fluoride concentrations in cow’s milk are also very low, ranging from 0.007 to 0.086 mg/L [3]. Fluoride levels in infant formulas in the United States vary, depending on the type of formula and the fluoride content of the water used to prepare the formula [3]. The typical fluoride concentration is less than 0.2 mg/L in milk-based infant formula and 0.2 to 0.3 mg/L in soy-based infant formula (not including contributions from tap water used to prepare the formula).

Only trace amounts of fluoride are naturally present in most foods, and most foods not prepared with fluoridated water provide less than 0.05 mg/100 g [1,6].

A variety of types of foods and their fluoride levels per serving are listed in Table 2.
Table 2: Fluoride Content of Selected Foods [3,6,7] Food 	Milligrams per
Serving
Tea, black, brewed, 1 cup 	0.07 to 1.5*
Coffee, brewed, 1 cup 	0.22*
Shrimp, canned, 3 ounces 	0.17
Bottled water with added fluoride, 1 cup 	≤0.17
Raisins, ¼ cup 	0.08
Oatmeal, cooked, ½ cup 	0.08*
Grapefruit juice, ¾ cup 	0.08
Potatoes, russet, baked, 1 medium 	0.08
Rice, cooked, ½ cup 	0.04*
Cottage cheese, ½ cup 	0.04
Pork chop, baked, 3 ounces 	0.03
Yogurt, plain, low-fat, 1 cup 	0.03
Lamb chop, cooked, 3 ounces 	0.03
Tortilla, flour, 1 tortilla, approx. 10" diameter 	0.02
Corn, canned, ½ cup 	0.02
Beef, cooked, 3 ounces 	0.02
Tuna, light, canned in water, 3 ounces 	0.02
Cheese, cheddar, 1½ ounces 	0.01
Bread, white or whole wheat, 1 slice 	0.01
Asparagus, cooked, 4 spears 	0.01
Chicken, cooked, 3 ounces 	0.01
Milk, fat-free or 1%, 1 cup 	0.01
Apple, raw, with skin, 1 medium 	0.01
Avocado, raw, ½ cup sliced 	0.01
Macaroni, plain, cooked, ½ cup 	0.00*
Tomato, raw, 1 medium 	0.00
Banana, 1 medium 	0.00
Egg, cooked, 1 large 	0.00
Carrots, raw, 1 medium 	0.00
Peanut butter, 1 tbsp 	0.00

*Amounts of fluoride might vary by levels in the water used to prepare these foods and beverages.
Fluoridated drinking water

Since 1962, the U.S. Public Health Service has recommended the addition of fluoride to drinking (tap) water to reduce the risk and severity of dental caries, one of the most common chronic diseases in children [8]. Many countries around the world now adjust the fluoride concentration of community drinking water supplies to the level recommended for the prevention of dental caries [9].

Although the U.S. Public Health Service recommended fluoride concentrations of 0.7 in warmer climates (where children were expected to drink more water) to 1.2 mg/L in cooler climates to prevent dental caries in 1962, it amended its recommended level in 2015 to 0.7 mg/L to maintain the ability to prevent caries while minimizing the risk of dental fluorosis [8,10]. In 1986, guidelines from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) established a maximum allowable concentration of 4.0 mg/L fluoride in public drinking water systems to prevent adverse effects from fluoride exposure (such as bone disease) and a recommended maximum concentration of 2.0 mg/L to prevent dental fluorosis [3,11]. The EPA is currently reviewing this regulation [12].

Fluoridated municipal drinking water—including water that people drink as well as foods and beverages prepared using municipal drinking water—accounts for about 60% of fluoride intakes in the United States [3,8]. In 2020, 62.9% of the U.S. population had access to a fluoridated community water system [13]. The fluoride additives used to fluoridate drinking water in the United States are fluorosilicic acid, sodium fluorosilicate, and sodium fluoride [14]. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has a webpage that lists fluoride levels in tap water by county [15]. Because of differences in amounts of fluoride in groundwater, private water sources (including well water) have variable fluoride concentrations [11].

Fluoride is not typically added to bottled drinking waters. However, when fluoride is added, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) stipulates that the total amount of fluoride (added plus naturally occurring) cannot exceed 0.7 mg/L [7]. Previously allowable levels ranged from 0.8 to 1.7 mg/L. FDA notes that this rule does not apply to bottled water without added fluoride that contains fluoride naturally from its source water. The amount of fluoride contained in bottled water is not required to be listed on the product label unless the label makes a claim about the product’s fluoride content [16].
Dietary supplements

Only a few dietary supplements contain fluoride, usually in the form of sodium fluoride [17]. Most of these products are multivitamin/mineral supplements, multivitamins plus fluoride, or supplements containing trace minerals only. Some fluoride supplements, usually intended for children, are in the form of drops. The most common amount of fluoride in supplements is 0.25 mg, although a few products contain 0.5 or 1 mg per serving [17].
Dental products

Most toothpaste sold in the United States contains fluoride in the form of sodium fluoride or monofluorophosphate, most commonly at a level of 1,000 to 1,100 mg/L (about 1.3 mg in a quarter teaspoon, a typical amount of toothpaste used for one brushing) [3]. The amount of fluoride ingested from toothpaste depends on the amount used, the person’s swallowing control, and how often the person uses toothpaste. Estimated typical amounts of fluoride ingested daily from toothpaste are 0.1 mg to 0.25 mg for infants and children age 0 to 5 years, 0.2 to 0.3 mg for children age 6 to 12 years, and 0.1 mg for adults [3]. Fluoride in toothpaste, regardless of its form, is well absorbed [1].

Other dental products that provide fluoride include mouth rinses for home use, topical fluoride preparations applied in dentists’ offices or through school-based programs, and dental devices (e.g., orthodontic bracket adhesives, glass-ionomer and some composite resin dental restorative materials, and some dental sealants and cavity liners) [3,18]. Gels used by dentists are typically applied one to four times a year and can lead to ingestions of 1.3 to 31.2 mg fluoride each time; varnishes are least likely to produce a high bolus of fluoride [3].
Medications

Some prescription medications contain fluoride, but not as the active ingredient. For example, voriconazole (VFEND or Vfend) is an oral antifungal medication used to treat several infectious conditions, including invasive aspergillosis, candidemia, and candidiasis [19]. Fluoride is a constituent of voriconazole and long-term use (e.g., for 4 months or more) of this medication can lead to high fluoride concentrations in serum and plasma [20-24]. The prescribing information for voriconazole advises discontinuation of voriconazole if skeletal fluorosis or periostitis (inflammation of the membrane surrounding and protecting the bones) develops [19].
Fluoride Intakes and Status

Most people in the United States consume adequate amounts of fluoride through foods containing naturally occurring fluoride, fluoridated tap water, and food products made with fluoridated tap water. According to the EPA, typical daily fluoride intakes in the United States from foods and beverages (including fluoridated drinking water) are 1.2 to 1.6 mg for infants and toddlers younger than 4 years, 2.0 to 2.2 mg for children age 4–11 years, 2.4 mg for those age 11–14 years, and 2.9 mg for adults [10].
Fluoride and Health

This section focuses on two conditions in which fluoride might play a role: dental caries and bone fractures.
Dental caries

Dental caries occurs when cariogenic bacteria in the mouth ferment foods and produce acids that dissolve tooth mineral [25]. Over time, this tooth decay can cause pain and tooth loss. Without treatment, dental caries can cause infections, impair growth and weight gain during childhood, affect school performance, impair quality of life, and possibly result in death [26-29]. Adequate fluoride intakes reduce the risk of dental caries in its initial stages by inhibiting demineralization and the activity of bacteria in dental plaque and by enhancing tooth remineralization [27].
Impact of water fluoridation on dental caries

Water fluoridation protects teeth in two main ways—by preventing the development of caries through ingestion of drinking water during the tooth-forming years and through direct contact of fluoride with teeth throughout life [30,31].

A 2015 Cochrane Review included 20 prospective observational studies (most conducted before 1975) [9]. The results showed that children receiving fluoridated water had 35% fewer decayed, missing, and filled primary (baby) teeth, and 26% fewer decayed, missing, and filled permanent (adult) teeth than children receiving unfluoridated water. Fluoridation also increased the number of children with no decay in their baby teeth by 15% and the number of children with no decay in their permanent teeth by 14%. The authors concluded that water fluoridation is effective for reducing dental caries rates in both primary and permanent teeth in children. However, the reviewers were unable to assess the effectiveness of water fluoridation for preventing caries in adults because no evidence met the review’s inclusion criteria (which required studies to include at least two groups, one receiving fluoridated water and one receiving unfluoridated water).

The Cochrane Review’s findings were confirmed by a 2018 cross-sectional study on the associations between fluoridated community water and dental caries in the United States [32]. The authors analyzed data on 7,000 children age 2 to 8 years and 12,604 children and adolescents age 6 to 17 years who participated in the National Health and Nutrition Examination Study (NHANES) from 1999 to 2004 and 2011 to 2014, respectively. The results showed that living in a county in which 75% or more of the drinking water contained at least 0.7 mg/L fluoride was associated with a 30% reduction in the rate of caries in primary teeth and a 12% reduction in the rate of caries in permanent teeth.

Some evidence shows that the addition of fluoride to drinking water can also prevent dental caries in adults. An observational study included 3,779 individuals in Australia age 15 and older who participated in the Australian 2004–2006 National Survey of Adult Oral Health [33]. In adults exposed to fluoridated community water supplies for at least 14 years, rates of decayed, missing, or filled teeth were 11%–12% lower than in adults whose drinking water during this period had negligible amounts of fluoride. An earlier study in 876 Australian Defence Force members age 17–56 years found that the average rate of decayed, missing, and filled teeth was 24% lower in those with access to water containing 0.5 to 1 mg/L fluoride for at least half of their lifetime than in those exposed for less than 10% of their lifetime [34].

These findings show that fluoridated drinking water can prevent dental caries in children and adults.
Impact of fluoride dietary supplements on dental caries in children

Some studies have assessed the impact of fluoride supplements on caries development in children. For example, a 2011 Cochrane Review of 11 randomized or quasi-randomized studies in a total of 7,196 children (most living in communities lacking access to fluoridated drinking water) found that 0.25–1 mg/day supplemental fluoride for 24–55 months reduced rates of decayed, missing, and filled tooth surfaces by 24% [35]. The authors concluded that fluoride supplements were associated with a lower caries incidence rate in permanent teeth. A 2013 systematic review found an even greater preventive effect of fluoride supplements on the basis of one randomized and four nonrandomized clinical trials in children [28]. The results showed that 0.25–1 mg/day fluoride supplementation reduced caries incidence rates in primary teeth by 48%–72% in areas where water fluoridation levels were lower than 0.6 mg/L. In two of these trials that monitored the children for 6–10 years, supplements were associated with a 33%–80% reduction in the incidence of caries at age 7–10 years.

The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) and the American Dental Association have issued fluoride supplement recommendations for children whose water supply contains little or no fluoride [26]. These recommendations are summarized in Table 3.
Table 3: Expert Panel Recommendations for Fluoride Supplementation in Children Source 	Age Range 	Recommendation
USPSTF [26] 	6 months and older 	• Fluoride supplement (dose not specified) for children whose water supply contains little or no fluoride*
American Dental Association [36]** 	6 months to 3 years 	• Fluoride supplement (0.25 mg/day) for children whose water supply contains less than 0.3 ppm (0.3 mg/L) fluoride
	3–6 years 	• Fluoride supplement (0.5 mg/day) for children whose water supply contains less than 0.3 ppm (0.3 mg/L) fluoride
• Fluoride supplement (0.25 mg/day) for children whose water supply contains 0.3 to 0.6 ppm (0.3 to 0.6 mg/L) fluoride
	6–16 years 	• Fluoride supplement (1 mg/day) for children whose water supply contains less than 0.3 ppm (0.3 mg/L) fluoride
• Fluoride supplement (0.5 mg/day) for children whose water supply contains 0.3 to 0.6 ppm (0.3 to 0.6 mg/L) fluoride

*No studies have addressed the dosage or duration of oral fluoride supplementation in this population.
**Recommended doses are based on poor-quality evidence.

Overall, the available evidence suggests that dietary supplements containing fluoride can reduce rates of dental caries in children who lack access to fluoridated drinking water. No studies have assessed the impact of fluoride supplements on caries development in adults.
Fluoride dietary supplements in pregnant women

Like other nutrients, fluoride is transferred from a pregnant woman to her fetus, so a few studies have evaluated the use of fluoride supplements by pregnant women to prevent dental caries in their children. However, the authors of a 2017 Cochrane Review found only one randomized controlled trial published in 1997 that met the review’s inclusion criteria [37]. This study assessed caries rates in 798 3-year-old children whose mothers had received 1 mg/day fluoride during the last 6 months of pregnancy [38]. The results showed no significant difference in the proportions of children who had decayed or filled primary tooth surfaces or who had caries. The authors of the Cochrane Review concluded that the 1997 study was of very low quality and that no evidence shows that fluoride supplementation in pregnant women prevents dental caries in their offspring.
Bone fractures

Because fluoride helps stimulate the formation of new bone, researchers have hypothesized that fluoride supplements might reduce bone fracture risk. However, research to date has provided only limited evidence supporting this hypothesis [39-41].

The findings of observational studies on the impact of fluoride levels in water on bone mineral density (BMD) and fracture risk have been mixed. A study of 7,129 white women found no significant differences in bone mineral density or risk of hip, vertebral, wrist, or humerus fracture between those exposed and those not exposed to fluoridated water between 1950 and 1994 [40]. In contrast, in a study in 8,266 Chinese residents age 50 years or older, people with access to water fluoride levels of approximately 1 mg/L had a lower overall risk of fractures, but not of hip fractures, than those with access to water containing negligible fluoride levels [41].

Clinical trials have also had conflicting findings about the efficacy of fluoride dietary supplements to prevent bone fractures. For example, a meta-analysis of 25 randomized controlled trials in a total of 954 participants (four of the studies included people with osteoporosis) showed a significant reduction in vertebral and nonvertebral fracture risk with daily doses of up to 20 mg fluoride (in the form of monofluorophosphate or sodium fluoride), but not with higher doses [42]. A more recent randomized controlled trial found that 2.5, 5, or 10 mg/day fluoride for 1 year in 180 postmenopausal women did not change BMD at any site assessed [43].
Health Risks from Excessive Fluoride

Long-term ingestion of excess fluoride in infancy and childhood, when the teeth are being formed, can lead to dental fluorosis [44]. The characteristics of this chronic condition usually vary from almost imperceptible white lines or flecks to white or brown stains on teeth [2]. Severe dental fluorosis can lead to pitting in tooth enamel. The risk of dental fluorosis increases with fluoride intakes above recommended amounts [45]. Severe enamel fluorosis is rare and there is no indication that it is caused by the recommended level of fluoride in public tap water [3,31].

Analysis of 1999–2004 NHANES clinical exam data showed that 20.8% of people age 6 to 49 had mild or very mild dental fluorosis, 2.0% had moderate fluorosis, and less than 1% had severe fluorosis [44]. The prevalence of any dental fluorosis was highest, 40.6%, in adolescents age 12 to 15 and lowest, 8.7%, in those age 40 to 49.

Subsequent analyses of NHANES data from 2001–2002 and 2011–2012 found that rates of dental fluorosis (from very mild to severe) increased during this 10-year period [46,47]. However, a report from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention concluded that the reported increase in dental fluorosis prevalence between NHANES 2001–2004 and 2011–2014 is not biologically plausible [48]. The authors suggested that there may have been a change over time in how the examiners evaluated the level of fluorosis [48,49].

Analyses of more recent NHANES 2015-2016 data showed that about two-thirds of children and adolescents age 6 years and older had some dental fluorosis, most of which was very mild or mild [48,50,51]. Research indicates that very mild or mild fluorosis does not negatively affect oral health-related quality of life [52,53]. Moreover, fluorosis severity tends to decline during adolescence and young adulthood [54,55]. Based on NHANES 2015-2016 data, only 1.4 to 1.8% of children and adolescents age 6 years and older have moderate or severe fluorosis [48,50,51], and no evidence indicates that the recommended level of fluoride in public tap water leads to severe fluorosis [3,31].

High doses of fluoride (typically from rare accidents resulting in excessively high levels of fluoridation of water, unintentional ingestion of fluoride products intended for topical use in dentists’ offices, or fluoride supplements inappropriately given to children) can result in nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, diarrhea, periostitis, and even death in rare cases [3,19,56]. According to one estimate, the acute dose that could cause serious systemic toxicity for fluoride is 5 mg/kg (e.g., 375 mg for someone who weighs 75 kg [165 pounds]) [56]. This dose would be virtually impossible to achieve from water or toothpaste containing standard levels of added fluoride.

Chronic, excess intakes of fluoride are also associated with skeletal fluorosis [57]. Its effects can range from occasional joint pain or stiffness to osteoporosis, muscle wasting, and neurological defects [1,58]. However, skeletal fluorosis is extremely rare in the United States and no evidence indicates that it is caused by the recommended level of fluoride in public tap water [1,57].

One study found an association between higher maternal urinary fluoride concentration (based on one spot urine sample) during the third trimester of pregnancy and higher rates of neurobehavioral problems in the child at 3 years of age [59]. However, another study found no association between exposure to fluoridated water during early childhood and subsequent emotional or behavioral development and executive functioning [60]. Other evidence suggests that higher fluoride intakes during early development, including during gestation, might be associated with a lower IQ and other cognitive impairments (e.g., delays in cognitive development) in children [61-63]. However, many experts consider this evidence to be weak and methodologically flawed [64-73].

Analyses of the association between fluoride and IQ in children suggest that dose is an important consideration. A 2023 meta-analysis of 8 studies found that fluoride exposure at concentrations similar to that used in fluoridated community drinking water in the United States is not associated with lower IQ scores [74]. Conversely, a 2024 review from the National Toxicology Program (NTP) concluded with moderate confidence that exposure to higher fluoride concentrations in drinking water (e.g., those above 1.5 mg/L) is associated with lower IQ in children [75]. The NTP review did not address lower concentrations of fluoride, such as the 0.7 mg/L concentration recommended by the U.S. Public Health Service for community drinking water.

The FNB has established ULs for fluoride from all sources for healthy individuals (Table 4) based on levels associated with dental and skeletal fluorosis [1].
Table 4: Daily Tolerable Upper Intake Levels for
Fluoride [1] Age 	Male 	Female 	Pregnancy 	Lactation
Birth to 6 months 	0.7 mg 	0.7 mg 		
7–12 months 	0.9 mg 	0.9 mg 		
1–3 years 	1.3 mg 	1.3 mg 		
4–8 years 	2.2 mg 	2.2 mg 		
9–13 years 	10 mg 	10 mg 		
14–18 years 	10 mg 	10 mg 	10 mg 	10 mg
19–51 years 	10 mg 	10 mg 	10 mg 	10 mg
51+ years 	10 mg 	10 mg 		
 
Interactions with Fluoride

Fluoride has no known, clinically relevant interactions with medications [76].
Fluoride and Healthful Diets

The federal government's 2020–2025 Dietary Guidelines for Americans notes that "Because foods provide an array of nutrients and other components that have benefits for health, nutritional needs should be met primarily through foods. ... In some cases, fortified foods and dietary supplements are useful when it is not possible otherwise to meet needs for one or more nutrients (e.g., during specific life stages such as pregnancy)."

For more information about building a healthy dietary pattern, refer to the Dietary Guidelines for Americans and the U.S. Department of Agriculture's MyPlate.

The Dietary Guidelines for Americans describes a healthy dietary pattern as one that

    Includes a variety of vegetables; fruits; grains (at least half whole grains); fat-free and low-fat milk, yogurt, and cheese; and oils.
    Includes a variety of protein foods such as lean meats; poultry; eggs; seafood; beans, peas, and lentils; nuts and seeds; and soy products.
    Limits foods and beverages higher in added sugars, saturated fat, and sodium.
    Limits alcoholic beverages.
    Stays within your daily calorie needs.

References

    Institute of Medicine, Food and Nutrition Board. Dietary Reference Intakes for Calcium, Phosphorus, Magnesium, Vitamin D, and Fluoride. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 1997.
    Touger-Decker R, Radler DR, Depaola DP. Nutrition and dental medicine. In: Ross AC, Caballero B, Cousins RJ, Tucker KL, Ziegler TR, eds. Modern Nutrition in Health and Disease. 11th ed. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2014:1016-40.
    National Research Council. Fluoride in Drinking Water: A Scientific Review of EPA's Standards. The National Academies Press, 2006.
    Pessan JP, Buzalaf MR. Historical and recent biological markers of exposure to fluoride. Monogr Oral Sci 2011;22:52-65. [PubMed abstract]
    Rango T, Vengosh A, Jeuland M, Whitford GM, Tekle-Haimanot R. Biomarkers of chronic fluoride exposure in groundwater in a highly exposed population. Sci Total Environ 2017;596-597:1-11. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Department of Agriculture. USDA National Fluoride Database of Selected Beverages and Foods, Release 2. U.S. Department of Agriculture, 2005.
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Beverages: Bottled Water. 2022.
    U. S. Department of Health and Human Services Federal Panel on Community Water Fluoridation. U.S. Public Health Service Recommendation for Fluoride Concentration in Drinking Water for the Prevention of Dental Caries. Public Health Reports 2015;130:318-31. [PubMed abstract]
    Iheozor-Ejiofor Z, Worthington HV, Walsh T, O'Malley L, Clarkson JE, Macey R, et al. Water fluoridation for the prevention of dental caries. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2015:Cd010856. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare. Public Health Service drinking water standards, revised 1962. Washington, DC: PHS Publication No. 956; 1962.
    U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Fluoride: Exposure and Relative Source Contribution Analysis. 2010.
    U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. EPA Will Expeditiously Review New Science on Fluoride in Drinking Water. 2025.
    Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Water Fluoridation Data & Statistics. 2024.
    National Science Foundation. Fluoridation Products and Fluoride. 2024.
    Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. My Water's Fluoride. 2024.
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Small Entity Compliance Guide: Revision of the Nutrition and Supplement Facts Labels. 2020.
    National Institutes of Health. Dietary Supplement Label Database. 2020.
    Cressey P, Gaw S, Love J. Estimated dietary fluoride intake for New Zealanders. J Public Health Dent 2010;70:327-36. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. VFEND Highlights of Prescribing Information. 2019.
    Barajas MR, McCullough KB, Merten JA, Dierkhising RA, Bartoo GT, Hashmi SK, et al. Correlation of Pain and Fluoride Concentration in Allogeneic Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplant Recipients on Voriconazole. Biology of Blood and Marrow Transplantation 2016;22:579-83. [PubMed abstract]
    Tan I, Lomasney L, Stacy GS, Lazarus M, Mar WA. Spectrum of Voriconazole-Induced Periostitis With Review of the Differential Diagnosis. American Journal of Roentgenology 2018;212:157-65. [PubMed abstract]
    Moon WJ, Scheller EL, Suneja A, Livermore JA, Malani AN, et al. Plasma fluoride level as a predictor of voriconazole-induced periostitis in patients with skeletal pain. Clin Infect Dis 2014;59(9):1237-1245. [PubMed abstract]
    Benitez LL, Carver PL. Adverse Effects Associated with Long-Term Administration of Azole Antifungal Agents. Drugs 2019;79(8):833-853. [PubMed abstract]
    Viel-Thériault I, Bittencourt H, Autmizguine J, Ovetchkine P. Skeletal fluorosis after prolonged voriconazole therapy. Paediatr Child Health 2020;25(1):7-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Featherstone JD. Dental caries: a dynamic disease process. Australian Dental Journal 2008;53:286-91. [PubMed abstract]
    Moyer VA, Force USPST. Prevention of dental caries in children from birth through age 5 years: US Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement. Pediatrics 2014;133:1102-11. [PubMed abstract]
    Institute of Medicine. Advancing Oral Health in America. National Academy of Science, 2011.
    Chou R, Cantor A, Zakher B, Mitchell JP, Pappas M. Preventing dental caries in children <5 years: systematic review updating USPSTF recommendation. Pediatrics 2013;132:332-50. [PubMed abstract]
    Kim JK, Baker LA, Davarian S, Crimmins E. Oral health problems and mortality. J Dent Sci 2013;8. [PubMed abstract]
    National institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research. Fluoride & Dental Health. 2020.
    Community Preventive Services Task Force. Dental Caries (Cavities): Community Water Fluoridation. 2013.
    Slade GD, Grider WB, Maas WR, Sanders AE. Water Fluoridation and Dental Caries in U.S. Children and Adolescents. Journal of dental research 2018;97:1122-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Slade GD, Sanders AE, Do L, Roberts-Thomson K, Spencer AJ. Effects of fluoridated drinking water on dental caries in Australian adults. J Dent Res 2013;92:376-82. [PubMed abstract]
    Mahoney G, Slade GD, Kitchener S, Barnett A. Lifetime fluoridation exposure and dental caries experience in a military population. Community Dent Oral Epidemiol 2008;36:485-92. [PubMed abstract]
    Tubert-Jeannin S, Auclair C, Amsallem E, Tramini P, Gerbaud L, Ruffieux C, et al. Fluoride supplements (tablets, drops, lozenges or chewing gums) for preventing dental caries in children. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2011:Cd007592. [PubMed abstract]
    Rozier RG, Adair S, Graham F, Iafolla T, Kingman A, Kohn W, et al. Evidence-based clinical recommendations on the prescription of dietary fluoride supplements for caries prevention: a report of the American Dental Association Council on Scientific Affairs. J Am Dent Assoc 2010;141:1480-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Takahashi R, Ota E, Hoshi K, Naito T, Toyoshima Y, Yuasa H, et al. Fluoride supplementation (with tablets, drops, lozenges or chewing gum) in pregnant women for preventing dental caries in the primary teeth of their children. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2017;10:Cd011850. [PubMed abstract]
    Leverett DH, Adair SM, Vaughan BW, Proskin HM, Moss ME. Randomized clinical trial of the effect of prenatal fluoride supplements in preventing dental caries. Caries research 1997;31:174-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Nasman P, Ekstrand J, Granath F, Ekbom A, Fored CM. Estimated drinking water fluoride exposure and risk of hip fracture: a cohort study. J Dent Res 2013;92:1029-34. [PubMed abstract]
    Phipps KR, Orwoll ES, Mason JD, Cauley JA. Community water fluoridation, bone mineral density, and fractures: prospective study of effects in older women. Bmj 2000;321:860-4. [PubMed abstract]
    Li Y, Liang C, Slemenda CW, Ji R, Sun S, Cao J, et al. Effect of long-term exposure to fluoride in drinking water on risks of bone fractures. J Bone Miner Res 2001;16:932-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Vestergaard P, Jorgensen NR, Schwarz P, Mosekilde L. Effects of treatment with fluoride on bone mineral density and fracture risk--a meta-analysis. Osteoporos Int 2008;19:257-68. [PubMed abstract]
    Grey A, Garg S, Dray M, Purvis L, Horne A, Callon K, et al. Low-dose fluoride in postmenopausal women: a randomized controlled trial. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2013;98:2301-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Beltran-Aguilar ED, Barker L, Dye BA. Prevalence and severity of dental fluorosis in the United States, 1999-2004. NCHS Data Brief 2010:1-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Bhagavatula P, Curtis A, Broffitt B, Weber-Gasparoni K, Warren J, Levy SM. The relationships between fluoride intake levels and fluorosis of late-erupting permanent teeth. J Public Health Dent 2018;78:165-74. [PubMed abstract]
    Wiener RC, Shen C, Findley P, Tan X, Sambamoorthi U. Dental Fluorosis over Time: A comparison of National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey data from 2001-2002 and 2011-2012. J Dent Hyg 2018;92:23-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Neurath C, Limeback H, Osmunson B, Connett M, Kanter V, et al. Dental Fluorosis Trends in US Oral Health Surveys: 1986 to 2012. JDR Clin Trans Res 2019;4(4):298-308. [PubMed abstract]
    National Center for Health Statistics, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion. Data quality evaluation of the dental fluorosis clinical assessment data from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, 1999–2004 and 2011–2016. National Center for Health Statistics. Vital Health Stat 2(183). 2019.
    Editorial Board, JDR Clinical & Translational Research. Editorial Expression of Concern. JDR Clinical & Translational Research 2019;4(4):309. [Abstract]
    Dong H, Yang X, Zhang S, Wang X, Guo C, et al. Associations of low level of fluoride exposure with dental fluorosis among U.S. children and adolescents, NHANES 2015-2016. Ecotoxicol Environ Saf 2021;221:112439. [PubMed abstract]
    Hung M, Hon ES, Mohajeri A, Moparthi H, Vu T, et al. A National Study Exploring the Association Between Fluoride Levels and Dental Fluorosis. JAMA Netw Open 2023;6(6):e2318406. [PubMed abstract]
    Do LG, Spencer A. Oral Health-Related Quality of Life of Children by Dental Caries and Fluorosis Experience. Journal of Public Health Dentistry 2007;67(3):132-139. [PubMed abstract]
    Chankanka O, Levy SM, Warren JJ, Chalmers JM. A literature review of aesthetic perceptions of dental fluorosis and relationships with psychosocial aspects/oral health-related quality of life. Community Dent Oral Epidemiol 2010; 38(2):97-109. [PubMed abstract]
    Curtis AM, Levy SM, Cavanaugh JE, Warren JJ, Kolker JL, et al. Decline in Dental Fluorosis Severity during Adolescence: A Cohort Study. J Dent Res 2020;99(4):388-394. [PubMed abstract]
    Levy SM, Warren JJ, Kolker JL, Weber-Gasparoni K. Generalized permanent dentition fluorosis severity becomes less evident over time among a birth cohort. Front Oral Health 2023;4:1198167. [PubMed abstract]
    Whitford GM. Acute toxicity of ingested fluoride. Monogr Oral Sci 2011;22:66-80. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation. CDC-Fluoridation: HHS Response to Rfr. 2004.
    Gutteridge DH, Stewart GO, Prince RL, Price RI, Retallack RW, Dhaliwal SS, et al. A randomized trial of sodium fluoride (60 mg) +/- estrogen in postmenopausal osteoporotic vertebral fractures: increased vertebral fractures and peripheral bone loss with sodium fluoride; concurrent estrogen prevents peripheral loss, but not vertebral fractures. Osteoporos Int 2002;13:158-70. [PubMed abstract]
    Malin AJ, Eckel SP, Hu H, Martinez-Mier EA, Hernandez-Castro I, et al. Maternal Urinary Fluoride and Child Neurobehavior at Age 36 Months. JAMA Netw Open 2024;7(5):e2411987. [PubMed abstract]
    Do LG, Spencer AJ, Sawyer A, Jones A, Leary S, et al. Early Childhood Exposures to Fluorides and Child Behavioral Development and Executive Function: A Population-Based Longitudinal Study. J Dent Res 2023;102(1):28-36. [PubMed abstract]
    Green R, Lanphear B, Hornung R, Flora D, Martinez-Mier EA, Neufeld R, et al. Association Between Maternal Fluoride Exposure During Pregnancy and IQ Scores in Offspring in Canada. JAMA Pediatr 2019;173:940-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Grandjean P. Developmental fluoride neurotoxicity: an updated review. Environ Health 2019;18:110. [PubMed abstract]
    Valdez Jimenez L, Lopez Guzman OD, Cervantes Flores M, Costilla-Salazar R, Calderon Hernandez J, Alcaraz Contreras Y, et al. In utero exposure to fluoride and cognitive development delay in infants. Neurotoxicology 2017;59:65-70. [PubMed abstract]
    Guichon JR, Cooper C, Rugg-Gunn A, Dickinson JA. Flawed MIREC fluoride and intelligence quotient publications: A failed attempt to undermine community water fluoridation. Community Dentistry and Oral Epidemiology 2024;Mar 25. [PubMed abstract]
    Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health. Community Water Fluoridation: A Review of Neurological and Cognitive Effects. 2019.
    Aghaji QN, Nwabuo CC. Association Between Maternal Fluoride Exposure and Child IQ. JAMA Pediatrics 2020;174:210-1. [PubMed abstract]
    Berezow AB. Association Between Maternal Fluoride Exposure and Child IQ. JAMA Pediatr 2019;174:210-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Bledsoe J, Breiger D, McKeever J. Association Between Maternal Fluoride Exposure and Child IQ. JAMA Pediatrics 2020;174:213. [PubMed abstract]
    Farrow S, Joffe AR. Association Between Maternal Fluoride Exposure and Child IQ. JAMA Pediatrics 2020;174:214. [PubMed abstract]
    Gehani CP, Pollick H, Stevenson RA. Association Between Maternal Fluoride Exposure and Child IQ. JAMA Pediatrics 2020;174:215-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Gong CX, James NE. Association Between Maternal Fluoride Exposure and Child IQ. JAMA Pediatrics 2020;174:212-3. [PubMed abstract]
    Ritchie SJ, Morris AJ, McConway K. Association Between Maternal Fluoride Exposure and Child IQ. JAMA Pediatrics 2020;174:213-4. [PubMed abstract]
    Waugh D. Association Between Maternal Fluoride Exposure and Child IQ. JAMA Pediatrics 2020;174:211-2. [PubMed abstract]
    Kumar JV, Moss ME, Liu H, Fisher-Owens S. Association between low fluoride exposure and children's intelligence: a meta-analysis relevant to community water fluoridation. Public Health 2023;219:73-84. [PubMed abstract]
    National Toxicology Program. NTP Monograph on the State of the Science Concerning Fluoride Exposure and Neurodevelopment and Cognition: A Systematic Review. NTP Monogr. 2024 Aug;(8):NTP-MGRAPH-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Natural Medicines. Fluoride. 2019.

Disclaimer

This fact sheet by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Office of Dietary Supplements (ODS) provides information that should not take the place of medical advice. We encourage you to talk to your health care providers (doctor, registered dietitian, pharmacist, etc.) about your interest in, questions about, or use of dietary supplements and what may be best for your overall health. Any mention in this publication of a specific product or service, or recommendation from an organization or professional society, does not represent an endorsement by ODS of that product, service, or expert advice.

Updated: April 11, 2025


 Folate: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals (original version)
Folate: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals
Table of Contents

    Introduction
    Recommended Intakes
    Sources of Folate
    Folate Intakes and Status
    Folate Deficiency
    Groups at Risk of Folate Inadequacy
    Folate and Health
    Health Risks from Excessive Folate
    Interactions with Medications
    Folate and Healthful Diets
    References
    Disclaimer

Introduction

Folate is a water-soluble B vitamin that is naturally present in some foods, added to others, and available as a dietary supplement. Folate, formerly known as folacin and sometimes vitamin B9, is the generic term for naturally occurring food folates and folates in dietary supplements and fortified foods, including folic acid. Food folates are in the tetrahydrofolate (THF) form and usually have additional glutamate residues, making them polyglutamates [1]. Folic acid is the fully oxidized monoglutamate form of the vitamin that is used in fortified foods and most dietary supplements. Some dietary supplements also contain folate in the monoglutamyl form, 5-MTHF (also known as L-5-MTHF, 5-methyl-folate, L-methylfolate, and methylfolate).

Folate functions as a coenzyme or cosubstrate in single-carbon transfers in the synthesis of nucleic acids (DNA and RNA) and metabolism of amino acids [1-3]. One of the most important folate-dependent reactions is the conversion of homocysteine to methionine in the synthesis of S-adenosyl-methionine, an important methyl donor. Another folate-dependent reaction, the methylation of deoxyuridylate to thymidylate in the formation of DNA, is required for proper cell division. An impairment of this reaction initiates a process that can lead to megaloblastic anemia, one of the hallmarks of folate deficiency [4].

When consumed, food folates are hydrolyzed to the monoglutamate form in the gut prior to absorption by active transport across the intestinal mucosa [2]. Passive diffusion also occurs when pharmacological doses of folic acid are consumed. Before entering the bloodstream, the enzyme dihydrofolate reductase reduces the monoglutamate form to THF and converts it to either methyl or formyl forms [1]. The main form of folate in plasma is 5-MTHF.

The activity of dihydrofolate reductase varies greatly among individuals [3]. When the capacity of dihydrofolate reductase is exceeded, unmetabolized folic acid can be present in the blood [1,5,6]. Whether unmetabolized folic acid has any biological activity or can be used as a biomarker of folate status is not known [7]. Folate is also synthesized by colonic microbiota and can be absorbed across the colon, although the extent to which colonic folate contributes to folate status is unclear [8]. The total body content of folate is estimated to be 15 to 30 mg; about half of this amount is stored in the liver and the remainder in blood and body tissues [1].

Serum folate concentrations are commonly used to assess folate status; a value above 3 ng/mL indicates adequacy [1,2,9]. This indicator, however, is sensitive to recent dietary intake, so it might not reflect long-term status. Erythrocyte folate concentrations provide a longer term measure of folate intakes; a concentration above 140 ng/mL indicates adequate folate status [2,3,7,9].

A combination of serum or erythrocyte folate concentration and indicators of metabolic function can also be used to assess folate status. Plasma homocysteine concentration is a commonly used functional indicator of folate status because homocysteine levels rise when the body cannot convert homocysteine to methionine due to a 5-MTHF deficiency [9]. Homocysteine levels, however, are not a highly specific indicator of folate status because they can be influenced by other factors, including kidney dysfunction and deficiencies of vitamin B12 and other micronutrients [1,3,9,10]. The most commonly used cutoff value for elevated homocysteine levels is 16 micromol/L, although slightly lower values of 12 to 14 micromol/L have also been used [2]. A homocysteine cutoff of 10 micromol/L has been proposed for assessing folate status in populations [3].
Recommended Intakes

Intake recommendations for folate and other nutrients are provided in the Dietary Reference Intakes (DRIs) developed by an expert committee of the Food and Nutrition Board (FNB) at the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine [2]. DRI is the general term for a set of reference values used for planning and assessing nutrient intakes of healthy people. These values, which vary by age and sex, include the following:

    Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA): Average daily level of intake sufficient to meet the nutrient requirements of nearly all (97%–98%) healthy individuals; often used to plan nutritionally adequate diets for individuals
    Adequate Intake (AI): Intake at this level is assumed to ensure nutritional adequacy; established when evidence is insufficient to develop an RDA
    Estimated Average Requirement (EAR): Average daily level of intake estimated to meet the requirements of 50% of healthy individuals; usually used to assess the nutrient intakes of groups of people and to plan nutritionally adequate diets for them; can also be used to assess the nutrient intakes of individuals
    Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL): Maximum daily intake unlikely to cause adverse health effects

Table 1 lists the current RDAs for folate as mcg of dietary folate equivalents (DFEs). The FNB developed DFEs to reflect the higher bioavailability of folic acid than that of food folate. At least 85% of folic acid is estimated to be bioavailable when taken with food, whereas only about 50% of folate naturally present in food is bioavailable [1,2,4]. Based on these values, the FNB defined DFE as follows:

    1 mcg DFE = 1 mcg food folate
    1 mcg DFE = 0.6 mcg folic acid from fortified foods or dietary supplements consumed with foods
    1 mcg DFE = 0.5 mcg folic acid from dietary supplements taken on an empty stomach

Factors for converting mcg DFE to mcg for supplemental folate in the form of 5-MTHF have not been formally established [11].

For infants from birth to 12 months, the FNB established an AI for folate that is equivalent to the mean intake of folate in healthy, breastfed infants in the United States (see Table 1).
Table 1: Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDAs) for Folate [2] Age 	Male 	Female 	Pregnancy 	Lactation
Birth to 6 months* 	65 mcg DFE* 	65 mcg DFE* 		
7–12 months* 	80 mcg DFE* 	80 mcg DFE* 		
1–3 years 	150 mcg DFE 	150 mcg DFE 		
4–8 years 	200 mcg DFE 	200 mcg DFE 		
9–13 years 	300 mcg DFE 	300 mcg DFE 		
14–18 years 	400 mcg DFE 	400 mcg DFE 	600 mcg DFE 	500 mcg DFE
19+ years 	400 mcg DFE 	400 mcg DFE 	600 mcg DFE 	500 mcg DFE

*Adequate Intake (AI)
Sources of Folate
Food

Folate is naturally present in a wide variety of foods, including vegetables (especially dark green leafy vegetables), fruits and fruit juices, nuts, beans, peas, seafood, eggs, dairy products, meat, poultry, and grains (Table 2) [4,12]. Spinach, liver, asparagus, and brussels sprouts are among the foods with the highest folate levels.

In January 1998, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) began requiring manufacturers to add 140 mcg folic acid/100 g to enriched breads, cereals, flours, corn meals, pastas, rice, and other grain products [13] to reduce the risk of neural tube defects (NTDs). Because cereals and grains are widely consumed in the United States, these products have become important contributors of folic acid to the American diet. The fortification program increased mean folic acid intakes in the United States by about 190 mcg/day [14]. In April 2016, FDA approved the voluntary addition of up to 154 mcg folic acid/100 g to corn masa flour [15].

Since November 1, 1998, the Canadian government has also required the addition of 150 mcg folic acid/100 g to many grains, including enriched pasta, corn meal, and white flour [6,16]. Many other countries, including Costa Rica, Chile, and South Africa, have also established mandatory folic acid fortification programs [6,17].
Table 2: Folate and Folic Acid Content of Selected Foods [12] Food 	Micrograms
(mcg) DFE per
serving 	Percent
DV*
Beef liver, braised, 3 ounces 	215 	54
Spinach, boiled, ½ cup 	131 	33
Black-eyed peas (cowpeas), boiled, ½ cup 	105 	26
Breakfast cereals, fortified with 25% of the DV† 	100 	25
Rice, white, medium grain, cooked, ½ cup† 	90 	22
Asparagus, boiled, 4 spears 	89 	22
Brussels sprouts, frozen, boiled, ½ cup 	78 	20
Spaghetti, cooked, enriched, ½ cup† 	74 	19
Lettuce, romaine, shredded, 1 cup 	64 	16
Avocado, raw, sliced, ½ cup 	59 	15
Spinach, raw, 1 cup 	58 	15
Broccoli, chopped, frozen, cooked, ½ cup 	52 	13
Mustard greens, chopped, frozen, boiled, ½ cup 	52 	13
Bread, white, 1 slice† 	50 	13
Green peas, frozen, boiled, ½ cup 	47 	12
Kidney beans, canned, ½ cup 	46 	12
Wheat germ, 2 tablespoons 	40 	10
Tomato juice, canned, ¾ cup 	36 	9
Crab, Dungeness, 3 ounces 	36 	9
Orange juice, ¾ cup 	35 	9
Turnip greens, frozen, boiled, ½ cup 	32 	8
Peanuts, dry roasted, 1 ounce 	27 	7
Orange, fresh, 1 small 	29 	7
Papaya, raw, cubed, ½ cup 	27 	7
Banana, 1 medium 	24 	6
Yeast, baker’s, ¼ teaspoon 	23 	6
Egg, whole, hard boiled, 1 large 	22 	6
Cantaloupe, raw, cubed, ½ cup 	17 	4
Vegetarian baked beans, canned, ½ cup 	15 	4
Fish, halibut, cooked, 3 ounces 	12 	3
Milk, 1% fat, 1 cup 	12 	3
Ground beef, 85% lean, cooked, 3 ounces 	7 	2
Chicken breast, roasted, 3 ounces 	3 	1

* DV = Daily Value. FDA developed DVs to help consumers compare the nutrient contents of foods and dietary supplements within the context of a total diet. The DV for folate is 400 mcg DFE for adults and children age 4 years and older [11], where mcg DFE = mcg naturally occurring folate + (1.7 x mcg folic acid). The labels must list folate content in mcg DFE per serving and if folic acid is added to the product, they must also list the amount of folic acid in mcg in parentheses. FDA does not require food labels to list folate content unless folic acid has been added to the food. Foods providing 20% or more of the DV are considered to be high sources of a nutrient, but foods providing lower percentages of the DV also contribute to a healthful diet.

† Fortified with folic acid as part of the folate fortification program.

The U.S. Department of Agriculture’s (USDA's) FoodData Central [12] lists the nutrient content of many foods and provides a comprehensive list of foods containing folate arranged by nutrient content and by food name.
Dietary supplements

Folic acid is available in multivitamins and prenatal vitamins, supplements containing other B-complex vitamins, and supplements containing only folic acid. Common doses range from 680 to 1,360 mcg DFE (400 to 800 mcg folic acid) in supplements for adults and 340 to 680 mcg DFE (200 to 400 mcg folic acid) in children’s multivitamins [18,19].

About 85% of supplemental folic acid, when taken with food, is bioavailable [2,4]. When consumed without food, nearly 100% of supplemental folic acid is bioavailable.

Dietary supplements containing 5-MTHF are also available. For some people, supplementation with 5-MTHF might be more beneficial than with folic acid (see People with an MTHFR polymorphism below) [20,21]. The bioavailability of 5-MTHF in supplements is the same as or greater than that of folic acid [22-27]. However, conversion factors between mcg and mcg DFE for 5-MTHF have not been formally established. FDA allows manufacturers to use either a conversion factor of 1.7 to be comparable to folic acid or their own established conversion factors not to exceed 1.7 [11].
Folate Intakes and Status

According to data from the 2013–2014 National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES), most people in the United States consume adequate amounts of folate. Mean dietary intakes of folate from foods range from 417 to 547 mcg DFE per day for children age 2–19 [28]. Average daily intakes of folate from food are 602 mcg DFE for males age 20 and older and 455 mcg DFE for females.

Although most people consume adequate amounts of folate, certain groups, including women of childbearing age and non-Hispanic black women, are at risk of insufficient folate intakes. Even when intakes of folic acid from dietary supplements are included, 19% of female adolescents age 14 to 18 years and 17% of women age 19 to 30 years do not meet the EAR [29]. Similarly, 23% of non-Hispanic black women have inadequate total intakes, compared with 13% of non-Hispanic white women.

About 35% of adults and 28% of children age 1 to 13 years in the United States use supplements containing folic acid [29,30]. Adults age 51 to 70 years are more likely than members of other age groups to take supplements containing folic acid. Use is also higher among non-Hispanic whites than non-Hispanic blacks or Mexican Americans. People age 2 years and older who take supplements containing folic acid get a mean of 712 mcg DFE from those supplements [28].

Measurements of erythrocyte folate levels also suggest that most people in the United States have adequate folate status. According to an analysis of NHANES 2003–2006 data, less than 0.5% of children age 1 to 18 years have deficient erythrocyte folate concentrations [18]. Mean concentrations in this age group range from 211 to 294 ng/mL depending on age, dietary habits, and supplement use. In adults, mean erythrocyte folate concentrations range from 216 to 398 ng/mL, also indicating adequate folate status [31].

Some population groups are at risk of obtaining excessive folic acid. About 5% of men and women age 51–70 and men age 71 and older have folic acid intakes exceeding the UL of 1,000 mcg per day, primarily because of the folic acid they obtain from dietary supplements [29]. Furthermore, 30% to 66% of children age 1 to 13 years who take folic acid-containing supplements have intakes of folic acid from both fortified food and dietary supplements exceeding the UL of 300–600 mcg per day [30]. Almost all children age 1 to 8 years who consume at least 200 mcg/day folic acid from dietary supplements have total intakes that exceed the UL [18]. Little is known about the long-term effects of high folic acid doses in children [7].
Folate Deficiency

Isolated folate deficiency is uncommon; folate deficiency usually coexists with other nutrient deficiencies because of its strong association with poor diet, alcoholism, and malabsorptive disorders [4]. Megaloblastic anemia, which is characterized by large, abnormally nucleated erythrocytes, is the primary clinical sign of folate or vitamin B12 deficiency [1,4]. Its symptoms include weakness, fatigue, difficulty concentrating, irritability, headache, heart palpitations, and shortness of breath [2].

Folate deficiency can also produce soreness in and shallow ulcerations on the tongue and oral mucosa; changes in skin, hair, or fingernail pigmentation; gastrointestinal symptoms; and elevated blood concentrations of homocysteine [1,2,4,32].

Women with insufficient folate intakes are at increased risk of giving birth to infants with NTDs [2]. Inadequate maternal folate status has also been associated with low infant birth weight, preterm delivery, and fetal growth retardation [1,33].
Groups at Risk of Folate Inadequacy

Frank folate deficiency is rare in the United States, but some individuals might have marginal folate status. The following groups are among those most likely to be at risk of folate inadequacy.
People with alcohol use disorder

People with alcohol use disorder frequently have poor-quality diets that contain insufficient amounts of folate. Moreover, alcohol interferes with folate absorption and hepatic uptake, accelerates folate breakdown, and increases its renal excretion [1,4,9]. An evaluation in Portugal, where the food supply is not fortified with folic acid, found low folate status in more than 60% of people with chronic alcoholism [34]. Even moderate alcohol consumption of 240 ml (8 fluid ounces) red wine per day or 80 ml (2.7 fluid ounces) vodka per day for 2 weeks can significantly decrease serum folate concentrations in healthy men, although not to levels below the cutoff for folate adequacy of 3 ng/ml [35].
Women of childbearing age

All women and adolescents who are capable of becoming pregnant should obtain adequate amounts of folate to reduce the risk of NTDs and other birth defects [2,36,37]. However, some women of childbearing age get insufficient amounts of folate even if they take dietary supplements [29]. Women of childbearing age should obtain 400 mcg/day folic acid from dietary supplements and/or fortified foods in addition to the folate provided by a varied diet [2].
Pregnant women

During pregnancy, demands for folate increase because of its role in nucleic acid synthesis [33]. To meet this need, the FNB increased the folate RDA from 400 mcg DFE/day for nonpregnant women to 600 mcg DFE/day during pregnancy [2]. This level of intake might be difficult for some women to achieve through diet alone. The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists recommends a prenatal vitamin supplement for most pregnant women to ensure that they obtain adequate amounts of folic acid and other nutrients [38].
People with malabsorptive disorders

Several medical conditions increase the risk of folate deficiency. People with malabsorptive disorders—including tropical sprue, celiac disease, and inflammatory bowel disease—might absorb less folate than people without these disorders [4]; for example, about 20%–60% of patients with inflammatory bowel disease have folate deficiency [39]. Diminished gastric acid secretion associated with atrophic gastritis, gastric surgery, and other conditions can also reduce folate absorption [4].
People with an MTHFR polymorphism

People with a genetic polymorphism, 677C>T, in the methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) gene have a reduced ability to convert folate to one of its active forms, 5-MTHF, because the methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase enzyme needed for this conversion is less active [21]. About 25% of Hispanics, 10% of Caucasians and Asians, and 1% of African Americans are homozygous for the 677C>T MTHFR polymorphism [27]. This polymorphism results in less biologically available 5-MTHF and, thus, reduced methylation potential, leading to elevated homocysteine levels and an increased risk of NTDs [1,3,20,40]. Although the research on the benefits of folate supplementation for people with this genetic polymorphism is inconclusive, some of these people might benefit from supplementation with 5-MTHF [20,21]. However, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends 400 mcg/day of folic acid, not 5-MTHF, for people who could become pregnant, even if they have a 677C>T MTHFR polymorphism (see Neural tube defects below) [41].
Folate and Health

This section focuses on seven diseases and disorders in which folate might play a role: autism spectrum disorder; cancer; cardiovascular disease and stroke; dementia, cognitive function, and Alzheimer’s disease; depression; NTDs; and preterm birth, congenital heart defects, and other congenital anomalies.

Autism spectrum disorder

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by difficulty communicating and interacting with other people, limited interests, and repetitive behaviors. The classification and diagnosis of ASD was changed in 2013 to include conditions previously known as autistic disorder, Asperger’s syndrome, and pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified [42]. The causes of ASD are not clear, but genetic and environmental factors (including infections) and prenatal exposure to certain drugs, pollutants, and pesticides are believed to play a role [43-46].

Emerging evidence suggests that periconceptional folic acid supplementation might reduce the risk of ASD or mitigate the potentially increased risk of ASD from prenatal exposure to certain drugs and toxic chemicals. The mechanism of these potential benefits is unknown, but it might be related to folic acid’s role in DNA methylation, which, in turn, can affect neurodevelopment [47-49].

Some, but not all, observational studies have shown associations between maternal use of folic acid and/or multivitamin supplements before and/or during pregnancy and lower risk of ASD in the women’s offspring. For example, the prospective Norwegian Mother and Child Cohort Study that included 85,176 children age 3.3 to 10.2 years found that children of mothers who took up to 400 mcg per day folic acid during all or part of the time from 4 weeks before to 8 weeks after the start of pregnancy were 39% less likely to have autistic disorder than those whose mothers did not take the supplements [50]. The results showed no significant associations, however, between supplementation and Asperger’s syndrome or pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified. In a U.S. population-based, case-control study of 837 children, those born to mothers who consumed a mean of 600 mcg folic acid per day or more from supplements and fortified breakfast cereals during the first month of pregnancy had a 38% lower risk of ASD than those of mothers who consumed less than 600 mcg per day [51]. This association was strongest for mothers and children with the 677C>T MTHFR polymorphism. Similarly, a 2018 case-control cohort study of 45,300 Israeli children demonstrated a significantly decreased risk of ASD in children of mothers who took folic acid and/or multivitamin supplements before and/or during pregnancy [52]. Conversely, a longitudinal, population-based cohort of 35,059 pregnant Danish women and their children found no association between periconceptional folic acid or multivitamin use and ASD [53].

Periconceptional use of folic acid might mitigate the potentially increased risk of ASD in children exposed to certain drugs and neurotoxins in utero [44-46]. An analysis of data from the Norwegian Mother and Child Cohort Study, which included 104,946 children, found that children exposed to antiepileptic drugs (known to reduce folate in vivo) in utero were 5.9 to 7.9 times more likely to have autistic traits at age 18 and 36 months if their mothers did not take folic acid periconceptionally than if they did [44]. In addition, the severity of autistic traits was inversely associated with both maternal plasma folate concentrations and folic acid doses. Similarly, in a U.S. study of 712 children, mothers exposed to any indoor pesticide during pregnancy who had folic acid intakes of 800 mcg or more per day during the first month of pregnancy were 1.7 times more likely to have a child with ASD than women with the same folic acid intakes who were not exposed to indoor pesticides [45]. The risk of ASD was even higher (2.5 times) if the women were exposed to indoor pesticides and had daily folic acid intakes of less than 800 mcg, suggesting that folic acid might attenuate the potentially increased risk of ASD from pesticide exposure.

Overall, the evidence to date suggests a possible inverse association between mothers’ periconceptional folic acid intakes and risk of ASD in their offspring. However, most, if not all, of the currently available data are observational, and confounding weakens the ability to demonstrate causal inference. Additional research and validation in other studies are needed before firm conclusions can be drawn.

Cancer

Several epidemiological studies have suggested an inverse association between folate intakes and status and the risk of colorectal, lung, pancreatic, esophageal, stomach, cervical, ovarian, breast, bladder, and other cancers [1,9,54,55]. Research has not established the precise nature of folate’s effect on carcinogenesis, but scientists hypothesize that folate might influence cancer development through its role in one-carbon metabolism and subsequent effects on DNA replication and cell division [55,56]. Evidence also indicates that folate might play a dual role in cancer initiation and progression [57]. That is, folate might suppress some types of cancer during the early stages of development, whereas high doses of folic acid taken after preneoplastic lesions have been established might promote cancer development and progression.

Results from clinical trials involving folic acid supplementation have been mixed. In addition, most trials have included other B-vitamins (frequently at doses well above RDA levels) and sometimes other nutrients, making it difficult to disentangle the effects, if any, of folic acid alone. For example, in a trial in France, 2,501 people with a history of cardiovascular disease received daily supplements of 560 mcg folic acid, 3 mg vitamin B6, and 20 mcg vitamin B12 for 5 years [58]. The researchers found no association between B-vitamin supplementation and cancer outcomes. In a combined analysis of two trials in Norway (where foods are not fortified with folic acid), supplementation with 800 mcg/day folic acid plus 400 mcg/day vitamin B12 for a median of 39 months in 3,411 people with ischemic heart disease increased cancer incidence rates by 21% and cancer mortality rates by 38% compared with no supplementation [59]. Findings from these Norwegian trials have raised concerns about folic acid supplementation’s potential to raise cancer risk.

The most thorough research has focused on folate’s effect on the development of colorectal cancer and its precursor, adenoma [1,55,60]. Several epidemiological studies have found inverse associations between high dietary folate intakes and the risk of colorectal adenoma and cancer [61-64]. For example, in the NIH-AARP Diet and Health Study, a cohort study of more than 525,000 people age 50 to 71 years in the United States, individuals with total folate intakes of 900 mcg/day or higher had a 30% lower risk of colorectal cancer than those with intakes lower than 200 mcg/day [62]. Other studies, however, have found no significant associations between dietary folate intakes [65,66] or circulating folate concentrations [67,68] and colorectal cancer risk.

Several clinical trials have examined whether supplemental folic acid (sometimes in combination with other B-vitamins) reduces the risk of colorectal adenoma in individuals with or without a history of adenoma. In the Women’s Antioxidant and Folic Acid Cardiovascular Study, which included 1,470 older women at high risk of cardiovascular disease, daily supplementation with 2,500 mcg folic acid, 50 mg vitamin B6, and 1,000 mcg vitamin B12 did not affect rates of colorectal adenoma during 7.3 years of intervention and about 2 years of postintervention follow-up [69]. A pooled analysis of three large clinical trials (one in Canada, one in both the United States and Canada, and one in both the United Kingdom and Denmark) found that folic acid supplementation for up to 3.5 years neither increased nor decreased adenoma recurrence rates in people with a history of adenoma [70]. However, in one of the studies included in the analysis, folic acid supplementation (1,000 mcg/day) significantly increased the risks of having three or more adenomas and of noncolorectal cancers, although it had no effect on colorectal cancer risk [71].

Folic acid supplementation also had no effect on the risk of all cancer types combined in the pooled analysis of three clinical trials cited above [70]. Similarly, a meta-analysis of 13 randomized trials showed no statistically significant effects of folic acid supplementation (median daily dose of 2,000 mcg) over an average treatment period of 5.2 years on overall cancer incidence or the incidence of colorectal, lung, breast, prostate, or other cancers [72].

Some research has found associations between folic acid supplementation and increased cancer risk. In a randomized clinical trial investigating osteoporotic fracture incidence in 2,919 participants age 65 years or older with elevated homocysteine levels, those who received 400 mcg folic acid plus 500 mcg vitamin B12 and 600 International Units (IU) vitamin D3 for 2 years reported a significantly higher cancer incidence, especially of colorectal and other gastrointestinal cancers, than those who received only 600 IU vitamin D3 [73]. In addition, a 2018 prospective study found that folic acid intake from fortified foods and supplements was positively associated with a risk of cancer recurrence among 619 patients with non–muscle-invasive bladder cancer, whereas natural folate intakes showed no significant association [74]. Higher plasma folate concentrations have also been associated with an increased risk of breast cancer in women with a BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation [75]. A secondary analysis of the study by Cole and colleagues [71] found that folic acid supplementation significantly increased the risk of prostate cancer [76] . Subsequent research has shown an association between increased cancer cell proliferation and higher serum folate concentrations in men with prostate cancer [77]. A meta-analysis of six randomized controlled trials that included a total of 25,738 men found that the risk of prostate cancer was 24% higher in men receiving folic acid supplements than those taking a placebo [78].

The mixed findings from clinical trials, combined with evidence from laboratory and animal studies indicating that high folate status promotes tumor progression, suggest that folate might play dual roles in cancer risk, depending on the dosage and timing of the exposure. Modest doses of folic acid taken before preneoplastic lesions are established might suppress cancer development in healthy tissues, whereas high doses taken after the establishment of preneoplastic lesions might promote cancer development and progression [9,60,79-82]. This hypothesis is supported by a 2011 prospective study that found an inverse association between folate intake and risk of colorectal cancer only during early preadenoma stages [83].

A 2015 expert panel convened by the National Toxicology Program and the National Institutes of Health Office of Dietary Supplements concluded that folic acid supplements do not reduce cancer risk in people with adequate baseline folate status. The panel also determined that the consistent findings from human studies that supplemental folic acid has an adverse effect on cancer growth justify additional research on the effects of folic acid supplementation on cancer risk [84]. Several important questions about these effects remain, including the dose and timing of folic acid supplementation that might exert tumor-promoting effects and whether this effect is specific to synthetic folic acid or other forms of folate [57].

Overall, the evidence to date indicates that adequate dietary folate intake might reduce the risk of some forms of cancer. However, the effects of supplemental folic acid on cancer risk are unclear, especially among individuals with a history of colorectal adenomas or other forms of cancer. More research is needed to fully understand how dietary folate and supplemental folic acid affect cancer risk and whether their effects differ by timing of exposure.

Cardiovascular disease and stroke

An elevated homocysteine level has been associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular disease [1,2]. Folate and other B vitamins are involved in homocysteine metabolism, and researchers have hypothesized that these micronutrients reduce cardiovascular disease risk by lowering homocysteine levels [1,85].

Folic acid (and vitamin B12) supplements lower homocysteine levels. However, these supplements do not actually decrease the risk of cardiovascular disease, although they appear to provide protection from stroke [85-94]. For example, in 5,442 U.S. women age 42 or older who were at high risk of cardiovascular disease, daily supplements containing 2,500 mcg folic acid, 1 mg vitamin B12, and 50 mg vitamin B6 for 7.3 years did not reduce the risk of major cardiovascular events [89]. In a substudy of 300 participants, the supplementation also had no significant effects on biomarkers of vascular inflammation [91], but it did lower homocysteine levels by a mean of 18.5% [89]. Another clinical trial included 5,522 patients age 55 years or older with vascular disease or diabetes from various countries (including the United States and Canada) that had a folic acid fortification program and some that did not [88]. Patients received 2,500 mcg folic acid plus 50 mg vitamin B6 and 1 mg vitamin B12 or placebo for an average of 5 years. Compared with placebo, treatment with B vitamins significantly decreased homocysteine levels but did not reduce the risk of death from cardiovascular causes or myocardial infarction. Supplementation did, however, significantly reduce the risk of stroke by 25%.

In a large trial in regions of China without folic acid fortification among 20,702 adults with hypertension but no history of stroke or myocardial infarction, supplementation with 800 mcg folic acid plus 10 mg enalapril (used to treat high blood pressure) for a median of 4.5 years significantly reduced the risk of stroke by 21% compared with enalapril alone [92]. The effect was more pronounced in participants with the lowest baseline levels of plasma folate. An analysis of 10,789 participants from this trial found that folic acid supplementation significantly reduced the risk of stroke by 73% among those who had a low platelet count and an elevated homocysteine level (increasing their risk of stroke) but had no significant effect on participants with a high platelet count and low homocysteine level [95]. These findings suggest that folic acid supplementation might primarily benefit those with insufficient folate levels, which are less common in countries, such as the United States, with folic acid fortification [96].

The authors of a 2012 meta-analysis of 19 randomized controlled trials that included 47,921 participants concluded that B-vitamin supplementation has no effect on the risk of cardiovascular disease, myocardial infarction, coronary heart disease, or cardiovascular death, although it does reduce the risk of stroke by 12% [86]. Likewise, the authors of the third update of a Cochrane Review of the effects of homocysteine-lowering interventions on cardiovascular events concluded that folic acid supplementation alone or in combination with vitamin B6 and vitamin B12 does not affect the risk of myocardial infarction or death from any cause, but it does reduce the risk of stroke [97]. Three other meta-analyses have also found that folic acid is effective for preventing stroke, especially in populations exposed to no or partial folic acid fortification [94,98,99].

Overall, the available evidence suggests that supplementation with folic acid alone or in combination with other B-vitamins reduces the risk of stroke, especially in populations with low folate status, but does not affect other cardiovascular endpoints.

Dementia, cognitive function, and Alzheimer’s disease

Most observational studies conducted to date have shown positive associations between elevated homocysteine levels and the incidence of both Alzheimer’s disease and dementia [32,79,100-104]. Scientists hypothesize that elevated homocysteine levels might have a negative effect on the brain via numerous mechanisms, including cerebrovascular ischemia leading to neuronal cell death, activation of tau kinases leading to tangle deposition, and inhibition of methylation reactions [103]. Some, but not all, observational studies have also found correlations between low serum folate concentrations and both poor cognitive function and higher risk of dementia and Alzheimer’s disease [79,100,101,103,105].

Despite this evidence, most clinical trial research has not shown that folic acid supplementation affects cognitive function or the development of dementia or Alzheimer’s disease, even though supplementation lowers homocysteine levels. In one randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial in the Netherlands, 195 people age 70 years or older with no or moderate cognitive impairment received 400 mcg folic acid plus 1 mg vitamin B12; 1 mg vitamin B12; or placebo for 24 weeks [106]. Treatment with folic acid plus vitamin B12 reduced homocysteine concentrations by 36% but did not improve cognitive function. In another clinical trial in older adults (mean age 74.1 years) with elevated homocysteine levels, supplementation with 400 mcg folic acid plus 500 mcg vitamin B12 and 600 IU vitamin D3 for 2 years lowered homocysteine levels but did not affect cognitive performance compared with 600 IU vitamin D3 alone [107].

As part of the Women’s Antioxidant and Folic Acid Cardiovascular Study, 2,009 U.S. women age 65 years or older at high risk of cardiovascular disease were randomly assigned to receive daily supplements containing 2,500 mcg folic acid plus 1 mg vitamin B12 and 50 mg vitamin B6 or placebo [108]. After an average of 1.2 years, B-vitamin supplementation did not affect mean cognitive change from baseline compared with placebo. However, in a subset of women with a low baseline dietary intake of B vitamins, supplementation significantly slowed the rate of cognitive decline. In a trial that included 340 individuals in the United States with mild-to-moderate Alzheimer’s disease, daily supplements of 5,000 mcg folic acid plus 1 mg vitamin B12 and 25 mg vitamin B6 for 18 months did not slow cognitive decline compared with placebo [109].

A secondary analysis of a study in Australia (which did not have mandatory folic acid fortification at the time of the study) found that daily supplementation with 400 mcg folic acid plus 100 mcg vitamin B12 for 2 years improved some measures of cognitive function, particularly memory, in 900 adults age 60 to 74 years who had depressive symptoms [110]. Another meta-analysis included 11 randomized controlled trials in more than 20,000 older adults (mean age 60–82 years) that administered 400 to 2,500 mcg folic acid plus 20–1,000 mcg vitamin B12 in 10 trials and 3–50 mg vitamin B6 in 8 trials for 0.3 to 7.1 years. The supplementation significantly lowered homocysteine levels but did not affect cognitive aging, global cognitive function, or specific cognitive domains (including memory, speed, and executive function) [111].

Several large reviews have evaluated the effect of B vitamins on cognitive function. Most of the authors concluded that supplementation with folic acid alone or in combination with vitamins B12 or B6 does not appear to improve cognitive function in individuals with or without cognitive impairment [112-115]. Some noted, however, that when researchers took baseline homocysteine and B-vitamin status into account, B-vitamin supplementation slowed cognitive decline in individuals at high risk of cognitive decline [103,104]. For example, one trial in the Netherlands administered either 800 mcg folic acid or placebo daily for 3 years to 818 participants age 50–70 years with elevated homocysteine levels (13 micromol/L or higher) and normal vitamin B12 levels [116]. Folic acid supplementation reduced homocysteine concentrations by 26% and significantly improved global cognitive function, memory, and information processing speed compared with placebo, but it did not affect sensorimotor speed, complex speed, or word fluency.

Additional clinical trials are needed to better understand the effects of folic acid supplementation on cognitive function and cognitive decline.

Depression

Low folate status has been linked to depression and poor response to antidepressants in some, but not all, studies. The possible mechanisms are unclear but might be related to folate’s role in methylation reactions in the brain, neurotransmitter synthesis, and homocysteine metabolism [117,118]. However, secondary factors linked to depression, such as unhealthy eating patterns and alcohol use disorder, might also contribute to the observed association between low folate status and depression [119.

In an ethnically diverse population study of 2,948 people age 15 to 39 years in the United States, serum and erythrocyte folate concentrations were significantly lower in individuals with major depression than in those who had never been depressed [119]. An analysis of 2005–2006 NHANES data found that higher serum concentrations of folate were associated with a lower prevalence of depression in 2,791 adults age 20 or older [117]. The association was statistically significant in females, but not in males. However, another analysis showed no associations between folate intakes from both food and dietary supplements and depression among 1,368 healthy Canadians age 67–84 years [118]. Results from a study of 52 men and women with major depressive disorder showed that only 1 of 14 participants with low serum folate levels responded to antidepressant treatment compared with 17 of 38 with normal folate levels [120].

A few studies have examined whether folate status affects the risk of depression during pregnancy or after childbirth. A systematic review of these studies had mixed results [121]. One study included in the review among 709 women in Singapore found that compared with women with higher plasma folate concentrations (mean 40.4 nmol/L [17.8 ng/mL]) at 26–28 weeks’ gestation, those with lower plasma folate concentrations (mean 27.3 nmol/L [12.0 ng/mL]) had a significantly higher risk of depression during pregnancy but not after giving birth [122]. Another study of 2,856 women in the United Kingdom found no significant associations between red blood cell folate levels or folate intakes from food and dietary supplements before or during pregnancy and postpartum depressive symptoms [123]. More recently, a cohort study of 1,592 Chinese women found a lower prevalence of postpartum depression in women who took folic acid supplements for more than 6 months during pregnancy than in those who took them for less time [124].

Studies have had mixed results on whether folic acid supplementation might be a helpful adjuvant treatment for depression when used with traditional antidepressant medications. In a clinical trial in the United Kingdom, 127 patients with major depression were randomly assigned to receive either 500 mcg folic acid or placebo in addition to 20 mg of fluoxetine daily for 10 weeks [125]. Although the effects in men were not statistically significant, women who received fluoxetine plus folic acid had a significantly greater improvement in depressive symptoms than those who received fluoxetine plus placebo. Another clinical trial in the United Kingdom randomized 475 adults with moderate to severe depression who were taking antidepressant medications to either 5,000 mcg folic acid or placebo daily for 12 weeks in addition to their antidepressants [126]. Measures of depression did not improve in participants taking folic acid compared with those taking placebo. The authors of a systematic review and meta-analysis of four trials of folic acid (<5,000 mcg/day in two trials; 5,000 mcg/day in two trials) in combination with fluoxetine or other antidepressants in patients with major depressive disorder concluded that less than 5,000 mcg/day folic acid might be beneficial as an adjunct to serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) therapy [127]. The authors noted, however, that this conclusion was based on low-quality evidence. Another meta-analysis of four clinical trials found that 500–10,000 mcg folic acid per day for 6–12 weeks as an adjunctive treatment did not significantly affect measures of depression compared with placebo [128].

Other studies have examined the effects of 5-MTHF supplementation as an adjuvant treatment to antidepressants, and results suggest that it might have more promise than folic acid [127-130]. In a clinical trial in 148 adults with major depressive disorder, supplementation with 7,500 mcg/day 5-MTHF for 30 days followed by 15,000 mcg/day for another 30 days, both in conjunction with SSRI treatment, did not improve measures of depression compared with SSRI treatment plus placebo [131]. However, in a subsequent trial with the same study design in 75 adults, supplementation with 15,000 mcg/day 5-MTHF plus SSRI treatment for the full 60 days did significantly improve depression compared with SSRI treatment plus placebo [131].

The authors of a systematic review and meta-analysis of three trials of 5-MTHF (<15,000 mcg/day in one trial, and 15,000 mcg/day in two trials) in combination with fluoxetine or other antidepressants, concluded that 15,000 mcg/day 5-MTHF might be an effective adjunct to SSRI therapy in patients with major depressive disorder, although they noted that this conclusion was based on low-quality evidence [127]. In addition, evidence-based guidelines from the British Association for Psychopharmacology [129] and the Canadian Network for Mood and Anxiety Treatments [130] state that 5-MTHF might be effective as an adjunct to SSRI treatment for depressive disorders.

Additional research is needed to fully understand the association between folate status and depression. Although limited evidence suggests that supplementation with certain forms and doses of folate might be a helpful adjuvant treatment for depressive disorders, more research is needed to confirm these findings. In addition, many of the doses of folate used in studies of depression exceed the UL and should be taken only under medical supervision.

Neural tube defects

NTDs result in malformations of the spine (spina bifida), skull, and brain (anencephaly). They are the most common major congenital malformations of the central nervous system and result from a failure of the neural tube to close at either the upper or lower end on days 21 to 28 after conception [132,133]. The prevalence rate of spina bifida and anencephaly (the two most common types of NTDs) in the United States is 5.5 to 6.5 per 10,000 births [134].

Because of its role in the synthesis of DNA and other critical cell components, folate is especially important during phases of rapid cell growth [135]. Although the mechanism has not been fully established, clinical trial evidence shows that adequate periconceptional folic acid consumption by women prevents a substantial proportion of NTDs [3,81,132,133,136,137].

Since 1998, when mandatory folic acid fortification began in the United States, NTD rates have declined by 28% [134]. However, significant racial and ethnic disparities persist. NTD prevalence rates are highest among Hispanic women and lowest among non-Hispanic black women. Factors that might contribute to these disparities include differences in dietary and supplement-taking practices [138] as well as factors other than folate status—such as maternal diabetes, obesity, and intake of other nutrients (e.g., vitamin B12)—which are also believed to affect the risk of NTDs [132,137,139-141]. In addition, women with the 677C>T MTHFR polymorphism—which is more common in Hispanics than Caucasians, Asians, and African Americans—might have an increased risk of NTDs [1,3,27,40]. Another consideration is the fact that the data on NTD prevalence rates were collected before 2016, when FDA approved the voluntary addition of folic acid to corn masa flour [15], an ingredient commonly consumed by Hispanic populations. Whether this policy change has affected the disparities in NTD rates between Hispanic women and other populations is not yet known.

Because approximately 50% of pregnancies in the United States are unplanned, adequate folate status is especially important during the periconceptional period before a woman might be aware that she is pregnant. The FNB advises all women and adolescents who are capable of becoming pregnant to “consume 400 mcg of folic acid daily from supplements, fortified foods, or both in addition to consuming food folate from a varied diet” [2]. The U.S. Public Health Service and CDC have published similar recommendations [36]. Consuming 400 mcg/day folic acid helps prevent NTDs, even in women with the 677C>T MTHFR polymorphism [41].

The authors of a 2017 systematic review concluded that folic acid supplementation protected users from NTDs in studies conducted before food fortification with folic acid began in the United States [142]. Although studies conducted since that time do not demonstrate a clear protective association (possibly because of food fortification effects, study design flaws, or inadequate sample sizes) [142], the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommends that all women and adolescents who are planning to become or capable of becoming pregnant take a daily supplement containing 400 to 800 mcg folic acid starting least 1 month before conception and continuing through the first 2 to 3 months of pregnancy [37].

The FNB has not issued recommendations for women who have given birth to a child with an NTD and plan to become pregnant again. However, other experts recommend that these women obtain 4,000 to 5,000 mcg supplemental folic acid daily starting at least 1 to 3 months before conception and continuing for 2½ to 3 months after conception [132,143]. These doses exceed the UL and should be taken only under medical supervision [143].

Preterm birth, congenital heart defects, and other congenital anomalies

According to observational studies, folic acid supplementation might increase mean gestational age and lower the risk of preterm birth [1,144]. In addition, folic acid in combination with a multivitamin supplement helps minimize the risk of congenital heart defects, possibly because cardiac tissue development depends on cells that require large amounts of folate [1,2,132].

The authors of a large population-based cohort study of about 98% of all births in Canada from 1990 to 2011 concluded that folic acid fortification of foods was associated with an 11% reduction in the rate of nonchromosomal congenital heart defects [145]. In a population-based case-control study in Atlanta involving 3,987 infants, congenital heart defects were 24% less common in the infants of women who took multivitamins containing folic acid during the periconceptional period than in the infants of women who did not [146]. A case-control study in California in 866 infants had similar results [147]. However, it is not possible to determine whether the findings from these studies could be attributed to components of multivitamins other than folic acid.

Studies have also found associations between the use of folic acid in combination with multivitamin supplements and reduced occurrence at birth of urinary tract anomalies, oral facial clefts, limb defects, and hydrocephalus, but the results of these studies have been inconsistent [2,132].

Additional research is needed to fully understand the extent to which maternal consumption of folic acid might affect the risk of these adverse birth outcomes. However, folic acid’s established role in preventing NTDs—and possibly other birth defects—underscores its importance during the periconceptional period.
Health Risks from Excessive Folate

Large amounts of folate can correct the megaloblastic anemia, but not the neurological damage, that can result from vitamin B12 deficiency. Some experts have therefore been concerned that high intakes of folate supplements might mask vitamin B12 deficiency until its neurological consequences become irreversible. Questions about this possibility still remain, but the focus of concern has shifted to the potential for large amounts of folate to precipitate or exacerbate the anemia and cognitive symptoms associated with vitamin B12 deficiency [2,85,148-153].

Concerns have also been raised that high folic acid intakes might accelerate the progression of preneoplastic lesions, increasing the risk of colorectal and possibly other cancers in certain individuals [1,3,60,80,81]. In addition, intakes of 1,000 mcg per day or more of folic acid from supplements during the periconception period have been associated with lower scores on several tests of cognitive development in children at age 4–5 years than in children of mothers who took 400 mcg to 999 mcg [154].

Intakes of folic acid that exceed the body’s ability to reduce it to THF lead to unmetabolized folic acid in the body, which has been linked to reduced numbers and activity of natural killer cells, suggesting that it could affect the immune system [5,155]. In addition, some scientists have hypothesized that unmetabolized folic acid might be related to cognitive impairment among older adults [156]. These potential negative health consequences are not well understood and warrant further research [1,9].

Studies have found unmetabolized folic acid in blood from children, adolescents, and adults [1,5,157,158]; breastmilk [159]; and cord blood from newborns [160,161]. Limited research suggests that single doses of 300 mcg or 400 mcg folic acid (a common amount in folic acid-containing supplements or servings of fortified foods, such as breakfast cereals) result in detectable serum levels of unmetabolized folic acid, whereas doses of 100 mcg or 200 mcg do not [162,163]. In addition, a dose-frequency interaction appears to occur in which smaller amounts of folic acid consumed more frequently produce higher unmetabolized folic acid concentrations than the same total dose consumed in larger, less frequent amounts [164].

Based on the metabolic interactions between folate and vitamin B12, the FNB established a UL for the synthetic forms of folate available in dietary supplements and fortified foods (Table 3) [2]. The FNB did not establish a UL for folate from food because high intakes of folate from food sources have not been reported to cause adverse effects [2]. Thus, unlike the RDAs, the ULs are in mcg, not mcg DFE. For folic acid, 1,000 mcg is equivalent to 1,667 mcg DFE because 0.6 mcg folic acid = 1 mcg DFE [11,164]. The ULs do not apply to individuals taking high doses of supplemental folate under medical supervision [2].
Table 3: Tolerable Upper Intake Levels (ULs) for Folate from Supplements or Fortified Foods [2] Age 	Male 	Female 	Pregnancy 	Lactation
Birth to 6 months 	Not possible to establish* 	Not possible to establish* 		
7–12 months 	Not possible to establish* 	Not possible to establish* 		
1–3 years 	300 mcg 	300 mcg 		
4–8 years 	400 mcg 	400 mcg 		
9–13 years 	600 mcg 	600 mcg 		
14–18 years 	800 mcg 	800 mcg 	800 mcg 	800 mcg
19+ years 	1,000 mcg 	1,000 mcg 	1,000 mcg 	1,000 mcg

* Breast milk, formula, and food should be the only sources of folate for infants.
Interactions with Medications

Folate supplements can interact with several medications. A few examples are provided below. Individuals taking these medications on a regular basis should discuss their folate intakes with their health care providers.
Methotrexate

Methotrexate (Rheumatrex, Trexall), used to treat cancer and autoimmune diseases, is a folate antagonist. Patients taking methotrexate for cancer should consult their oncologist before taking folate supplements because the supplements could interfere with methotrexate’s anticancer effects [166]. However, folate supplements might reduce the gastrointestinal side effects of low-dose methotrexate taken for rheumatoid arthritis or psoriasis [167,168].
Antiepileptic medications

Antiepileptic medications, such as phenytoin (Dilantin), carbamazepine (Carbatrol, Tegretol, Equetro, Epitol), and valproate (Depacon), are used to treat epilepsy, psychiatric diseases, and other medical conditions. These medications can reduce serum folate levels [169]. Furthermore, folate supplements might reduce serum levels of these medications, so patients taking antiepileptic drugs should check with their health care provider before taking folate supplements [166].
Sulfasalazine

Sulfasalazine (Azulfidine) is used primarily to treat ulcerative colitis. It inhibits the intestinal absorption of folate and can cause folate deficiency [170]. Patients taking sulfasalazine should ask their health care provider whether they should increase their dietary folate intake, start taking a folate supplement, or both [166].
Folate and Healthful Diets

The federal government's 2020–2025 Dietary Guidelines for Americans notes that "Because foods provide an array of nutrients and other components that have benefits for health, nutritional needs should be met primarily through foods. ... In some cases, fortified foods and dietary supplements are useful when it is not possible otherwise to meet needs for one or more nutrients (e.g., during specific life stages such as pregnancy)."

For more information about building a healthy dietary pattern, refer to the Dietary Guidelines for Americans and the USDA's MyPlate.

The Dietary Guidelines for Americans describes a healthy dietary pattern as one that

    Includes a variety of vegetables; fruits; grains (at least half whole grains); fat-free and low-fat milk, yogurt, and cheese; and oils.
        Many fruits and vegetables are good sources of folate. In the United States, bread, cereal, flour, cornmeal, pasta, rice, and other grain products are fortified with folic acid.
    Includes a variety of protein foods such as lean meats; poultry; eggs; seafood; beans, peas, and lentils; nuts and seeds; and soy products.
        Beef liver contains high amounts of folate. Peas, beans, nuts, and eggs also have folate.
    Limits foods and beverages higher in added sugars, saturated fat, and sodium.
    Limits alcoholic beverages.
    Stays within your daily calorie needs.

References

    Bailey LB, Caudill MA. Folate. In: Erdman JW, Macdonald IA, Zeisel SH, eds. Present Knowledge in Nutrition. 10th ed. Washington, DC: Wiley-Blackwell; 2012:321-42.
    Institute of Medicine. Food and Nutrition Board. Dietary Reference Intakes: Thiamin, Riboflavin, Niacin, Vitamin B6, Folate, Vitamin B12, Pantothenic Acid, Biotin, and Choline. Washington, DC: National Academy Press; 1998.
    Stover PJ. Folic acid. In: Ross AC, Caballero B, Cousins RJ, Tucker KL, Ziegler TR, eds. Modern Nutrition in Health and Disease. 11th ed. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2012:358-68.
    Carmel R. Folic acid. In: Shils M, Shike M, Ross A, Caballero B, Cousins RJ, eds. Modern Nutrition in Health and Disease. 11th ed. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2005:470-81.
    Paniz C, Bertinato JF, Lucena MR, et al. A daily dose of 5 mg folic acid for 90 days is associated with increased serum unmetabolized folic acid and reduced natural killer cell cytotoxicity in healthy Brazilian adults. J Nutr 2017;147:1677-85. [PubMed abstract]
    Crider KS, Bailey LB, Berry RJ. Folic acid food fortification-its history, effect, concerns, and future directions. Nutrients 2011;3:370-84. [PubMed abstract]
    Yetley EA, Pfeiffer CM, Phinney KW, et al. Biomarkers of folate status in NHANES: a roundtable summary. Am J Clin Nutr 2011;94:303S-12S. [PubMed abstract]
    Lakoff A, Fazili Z, Aufreiter S, et al. Folate is absorbed across the human colon: evidence by using enteric-coated caplets containing 13C-labeled [6S]-5-formyltetrahydrofolate. Am J Clin Nutr 2014;100:1278-86. [PubMed abstract]
    Bailey LB, Stover PJ, McNulty H, et al. Biomarkers of nutrition for development-folate review. J Nutr 2015;145:1636S-80S. [PubMed abstract]
    Green R. Indicators for assessing folate and vitamin B-12 status and for monitoring the efficacy of intervention strategies. Am J Clin Nutr 2011;94:666S-72S. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Food Labeling: Revision of the Nutrition and Supplement Facts Labels. 2016.
    U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service. FoodData Central, 2019.
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Food Standards: Amendment of Standards of Identity For Enriched Grain Products to Require Addition of Folic Acid. Federal Register 1996;61:8781-97.
    Choumenkovitch SF, Selhub J, Wilson PW, et al. Folic acid intake from fortification in United States exceeds predictions. J Nutr 2002;132:2792-8. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. FDA approves folic acid fortification of corn masa flour. 2016. [PubMed abstract]
    Government of Canada. Regulations amending the food and drug regulations (1066). Canada Gazette 1998;132.
    Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. CDC grand rounds: Additional opportunities to prevent neural tube defects with folic acid fortification. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2010;59:980-4. [PubMed abstract]
    Yeung LF, Cogswell ME, Carriquiry AL, et al. Contributions of enriched cereal-grain products, ready-to-eat cereals, and supplements to folic acid and vitamin B-12 usual intake and folate and vitamin B-12 status in US children: National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES), 2003-2006. Am J Clin Nutr 2011;93:172-85. [PubMed abstract]
    National Institutes of Health. Dietary Supplement Label Database. 2018.
    Scaglione F, Panzavolta G. Folate, folic acid and 5-methyltetrahydrofolate are not the same thing. Xenobiotica 2014;44:480-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Greenberg JA, Bell SJ, Guan Y, et al. Folic acid supplementation and pregnancy: more than just neural tube defect prevention. Rev Obstet Gynecol 2011;4:52-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Henderson AM, Aleliunas RE, Loh SP, et al. l-5-Methyltetrahydrofolate supplementation increases blood folate concentrations to a greater extent than folic acid supplementation in Malaysian women. J Nutr 2018;148:885-90. [PubMed abstract]
    Green TJ, Liu Y, Dadgar S, et al. Wheat rolls fortified with microencapsulated L-5-methyltetrahydrofolic acid or equimolar folic acid increase blood folate concentrations to a similar extent in healthy men and women. J Nutr 2013;143:867-71. [PubMed abstract]
    Venn BJ, Green TJ, Moser R, et al. Comparison of the effect of low-dose supplementation with L-5-methyltetrahydrofolate or folic acid on plasma homocysteine: a randomized placebo-controlled study. Am J Clin Nutr 2003;77:658-62. [PubMed abstract]
    Venn BJ, Green TJ, Moser R, et al. Increases in blood folate indices are similar in women of childbearing age supplemented with [6S]-5-methyltetrahydrofolate and folic acid. J Nutr 2002;132:3353-5. [PubMed abstract]
    Lamers Y, Prinz-Langenohl R, Bramswig S, et al. Red blood cell folate concentrations increase more after supplementation with [6S]-5-methyltetrahydrofolate than with folic acid in women of childbearing age. Am J Clin Nutr 2006;84:156-61. [PubMed abstract]
    Pietrzik K, Bailey L, Shane B. Folic acid and L-5-methyltetrahydrofolate: comparison of clinical pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics. Clin Pharmacokinet 2010;49:535-48. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service. What We Eat in America, 2013-2014. 2017.
    Bailey RL, Dodd KW, Gahche JJ, et al. Total folate and folic acid intake from foods and dietary supplements in the United States: 2003-2006. Am J Clin Nutr 2010;91:231-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Bailey RL, McDowell MA, Dodd KW, et al. Total folate and folic acid intakes from foods and dietary supplements of US children aged 1-13 y. Am J Clin Nutr 2010;92:353-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Yang Q, Cogswell ME, Hamner HC, et al. Folic acid source, usual intake, and folate and vitamin B-12 status in US adults: National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) 2003-2006. Am J Clin Nutr 2010;91:64-72. [PubMed abstract]
    Ho RC, Cheung MW, Fu E, et al. Is high homocysteine level a risk factor for cognitive decline in elderly? A systematic review, meta-analysis, and meta-regression. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry 2011;19:607-17. [PubMed abstract]
    Scholl TO, Johnson WG. Folic acid: influence on the outcome of pregnancy. Am J Clin Nutr 2000;71:1295S-303S. [PubMed abstract]
    Gloria L, Cravo M, Camilo ME, et al. Nutritional deficiencies in chronic alcoholics: relation to dietary intake and alcohol consumption. Am J Gastroenterol 1997;92:485-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Gibson A, Woodside JV, Young IS, et al. Alcohol increases homocysteine and reduces B vitamin concentration in healthy male volunteers--a randomized, crossover intervention study. QJM 2008;101:881-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Folic acid 2012.
    U. S. Preventive Services Task Force, Bibbins-Domingo K, Grossman DC, et al. Folic acid supplementation for the prevention of neural tube defects: US Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement. JAMA 2017;317:183-9. [PubMed abstract]
    American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Frequently Asked Questions, FAQ001, Pregnancy, Nutrition During Pregnancy. 2018.
    Rossi RE, Whyand T, Murray CD, et al. The role of dietary supplements in inflammatory bowel disease: a systematic review. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2016;28:1357-64. [PubMed abstract]
    Molloy AM, Pangilinan F, Brody LC. Genetic risk factors for folate-responsive neural tube defects. Annu Rev Nutr 2017;37:269-91. [PubMed abstract]
    Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. MTHFR Gene, Folic Acid, and Preventing Neural Tube Defects. 2022.
    National Institute of Mental Health. Autism spectrum disorder. 2018.
    Berry RJ, Crider KS, Yeargin-Allsopp M. Periconceptional folic acid and risk of autism spectrum disorders. JAMA 2013;309:611-3. [PubMed abstract]
    Bjork M, Riedel B, Spigset O, et al. Association of folic acid supplementation during pregnancy with the risk of autistic traits in children exposed to antiepileptic drugs in utero. JAMA Neurol 2018;75:160-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Schmidt RJ, Kogan V, Shelton JF, et al. Combined prenatal pesticide exposure and folic acid intake in relation to autism spectrum disorder. Environ Health Perspect 2017;125:097007. [PubMed abstract]
    Goodrich AJ, Volk HE, Tancredi DJ, et al. Joint effects of prenatal air pollutant exposure and maternal folic acid supplementation on risk of autism spectrum disorder. Autism Res 2018;11:69-80. [PubMed abstract]
    Roffman JL. Neuroprotective effects of prenatal folic acid supplementation: why timing matters. JAMA Psychiatry 2018;75:747-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Caffrey A, Irwin RE, McNulty H, et al. Gene-specific DNA methylation in newborns in response to folic acid supplementation during the second and third trimesters of pregnancy: epigenetic analysis from a randomized controlled trial. Am J Clin Nutr 2018;107:566-75. [PubMed abstract]
    DeVilbiss EA, Gardner RM, Newschaffer CJ, et al. Maternal folate status as a risk factor for autism spectrum disorders: a review of existing evidence. Br J Nutr 2015;114:663-72. [PubMed abstract]
    Suren P, Roth C, Bresnahan M, et al. Association between maternal use of folic acid supplements and risk of autism spectrum disorders in children. JAMA 2013;309:570-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Schmidt RJ, Tancredi DJ, Ozonoff S, et al. Maternal periconceptional folic acid intake and risk of autism spectrum disorders and developmental delay in the CHARGE (CHildhood Autism Risks from Genetics and Environment) case-control study. Am J Clin Nutr 2012;96:80-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Levine SZ, Kodesh A, Viktorin A, et al. Association of maternal use of folic acid and multivitamin supplements in the periods before and during pregnancy with the risk of autism spectrum disorder in offspring. JAMA Psychiatry 2018;75:176-84. [PubMed abstract]
    Virk J, Liew Z, Olsen J, et al. Preconceptional and prenatal supplementary folic acid and multivitamin intake and autism spectrum disorders. Autism 2016;20:710-8. [PubMed abstract]
    He H, Shui B. Folate intake and risk of bladder cancer: a meta-analysis of epidemiological studies. Int J Food Sci Nutr 2014;65:286-92. [PubMed abstract]
    Kim YI. Will mandatory folic acid fortification prevent or promote cancer? Am J Clin Nutr 2004;80:1123-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Kim YI. Folate and carcinogenesis: evidence, mechanisms, and implications. J Nutr Biochem 1999;10:66-88. [PubMed abstract]
    Kim YI. Folate and cancer: a tale of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde? Am J Clin Nutr 2018;107:139-42. [PubMed abstract]
    Andreeva VA, Touvier M, Kesse-Guyot E, et al. B vitamin and/or omega-3 fatty acid supplementation and cancer: ancillary findings from the supplementation with folate, vitamins B6 and B12, and/or omega-3 fatty acids (SU.FOL.OM3) randomized trial. Arch Intern Med 2012;172:540-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Ebbing M, Bonaa KH, Nygard O, et al. Cancer incidence and mortality after treatment with folic acid and vitamin B12. JAMA 2009;302:2119-26. [PubMed abstract]
    Mason JB. Unraveling the complex relationship between folate and cancer risk. Biofactors 2011;37:253-60. [PubMed abstract]
    Giovannucci E, Stampfer MJ, Colditz GA, et al. Folate, methionine, and alcohol intake and risk of colorectal adenoma. J Natl Cancer Inst 1993;85:875-84. [PubMed abstract]
    Gibson TM, Weinstein SJ, Pfeiffer RM, et al. Pre- and postfortification intake of folate and risk of colorectal cancer in a large prospective cohort study in the United States. Am J Clin Nutr 2011;94:1053-62. [PubMed abstract]
    Sanjoaquin MA, Allen N, Couto E, et al. Folate intake and colorectal cancer risk: a meta-analytical approach. Int J Cancer 2005;113:825-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Kennedy DA, Stern SJ, Moretti M, et al. Folate intake and the risk of colorectal cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Cancer Epidemiol 2011;35:2-10. [PubMed abstract]
    Bassett JK, Severi G, Hodge AM, et al. Dietary intake of B vitamins and methionine and colorectal cancer risk. Nutr Cancer 2013;65:659-67. [PubMed abstract]
    de Vogel S, Dindore V, van Engeland M, et al. Dietary folate, methionine, riboflavin, and vitamin B-6 and risk of sporadic colorectal cancer. J Nutr 2008;138:2372-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Neuhouser ML, Cheng TY, Beresford SA, et al. Red blood cell folate and plasma folate are not associated with risk of incident colorectal cancer in the Women's Health Initiative observational study. Int J Cancer 2015;137:930-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Chuang SC, Rota M, Gunter MJ, et al. Quantifying the dose-response relationship between circulating folate concentrations and colorectal cancer in cohort studies: a meta-analysis based on a flexible meta-regression model. Am J Epidemiol 2013;178:1028-37. [PubMed abstract]
    Song Y, Manson JE, Lee IM, et al. Effect of combined folic acid, vitamin B(6), and vitamin B(12) on colorectal adenoma. J Natl Cancer Inst 2012;104:1562-75. [PubMed abstract]
    Figueiredo JC, Mott LA, Giovannucci E, et al. Folic acid and prevention of colorectal adenomas: a combined analysis of randomized clinical trials. Int J Cancer 2011;129:192-203. [PubMed abstract]
    Cole BF, Baron JA, Sandler RS, et al. Folic acid for the prevention of colorectal adenomas: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2007;297:2351-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Vollset SE, Clarke R, Lewington S, et al. Effects of folic acid supplementation on overall and site-specific cancer incidence during the randomised trials: meta-analyses of data on 50,000 individuals. Lancet 2013;381:1029-36. [PubMed abstract]
    van Wijngaarden JP, Swart KM, Enneman AW, et al. Effect of daily vitamin B-12 and folic acid supplementation on fracture incidence in elderly individuals with an elevated plasma homocysteine concentration: B-PROOF, a randomized controlled trial. Am J Clin Nutr 2014;100:1578-86. [PubMed abstract]
    Tu H, Dinney CP, Ye Y, et al. Is folic acid safe for non-muscle-invasive bladder cancer patients? An evidence-based cohort study. Am J Clin Nutr 2018;107:208-16. [PubMed abstract]
    Kim SJ, Zuchniak A, Sohn KJ, et al. Plasma folate, vitamin B-6, and vitamin B-12 and breast cancer risk in BRCA1- and BRCA2-mutation carriers: a prospective study. Am J Clin Nutr 2016;104:671-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Figueiredo JC, Grau MV, Haile RW, et al. Folic acid and risk of prostate cancer: results from a randomized clinical trial. J Natl Cancer Inst 2009;101:432-5. [PubMed abstract]
    Tomaszewski JJ, Cummings JL, Parwani AV, et al. Increased cancer cell proliferation in prostate cancer patients with high levels of serum folate. Prostate 2011;71:1287-93. [PubMed abstract]
    Wien TN, Pike E, Wisloff T, et al. Cancer risk with folic acid supplements: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ Open 2012;2:e000653. [PubMed abstract]
    Kim S, Choi BY, Nam JH, et al. Cognitive impairment is associated with elevated serum homocysteine levels among older adults. Eur J Nutr 2018. [PubMed abstract]
    Kim YI. Folate: a magic bullet or a double edged sword for colorectal cancer prevention? Gut 2006;55:1387-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Ulrich CM, Potter JD. Folate supplementation: too much of a good thing? Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2006;15:189-93. [PubMed abstract]
    Mason JB, Tang SY. Folate status and colorectal cancer risk: a 2016 update. Mol Aspects Med 2017;53:73-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Lee JE, Willett WC, Fuchs CS, et al. Folate intake and risk of colorectal cancer and adenoma: modification by time. Am J Clin Nutr 2011;93:817-25. [PubMed abstract]
    National Toxicology Program. NTP monograph: identifying research needs for assessing safe use of high intakes of folic acid. National Toxicology Program, 2015.
    Clarke R, Halsey J, Lewington S, et al. Effects of lowering homocysteine levels with B vitamins on cardiovascular disease, cancer, and cause-specific mortality: Meta-analysis of 8 randomized trials involving 37 485 individuals. Arch Intern Med 2010;170:1622-31. [PubMed abstract]
    Huang T, Chen Y, Yang B, et al. Meta-analysis of B vitamin supplementation on plasma homocysteine, cardiovascular and all-cause mortality. Clin Nutr 2012;31:448-54. [PubMed abstract]
    Toole JF, Malinow MR, Chambless LE, et al. Lowering homocysteine in patients with ischemic stroke to prevent recurrent stroke, myocardial infarction, and death: the Vitamin Intervention for Stroke Prevention (VISP) randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2004;291:565-75. [PubMed abstract]
    Lonn E, Yusuf S, Arnold MJ, et al. Homocysteine lowering with folic acid and B vitamins in vascular disease. N Engl J Med 2006;354:1567-77. [PubMed abstract]
    Albert CM, Cook NR, Gaziano JM, et al. Effect of folic acid and B vitamins on risk of cardiovascular events and total mortality among women at high risk for cardiovascular disease: a randomized trial. JAMA 2008;299:2027-36. [PubMed abstract]
    Ebbing M, Bleie O, Ueland PM, et al. Mortality and cardiovascular events in patients treated with homocysteine-lowering B vitamins after coronary angiography: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2008;300:795-804. [PubMed abstract]
    Christen WG, Cook NR, Van Denburgh M, et al. Effect of combined treatment with folic acid, vitamin B6, and vitamin B12 on plasma biomarkers of inflammation and endothelial dysfunction in women. J Am Heart Assoc 2018;7. [PubMed abstract]
    Huo Y, Li J, Qin X, et al. Efficacy of folic acid therapy in primary prevention of stroke among adults with hypertension in China: the CSPPT randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2015;313:1325-35. [PubMed abstract]
    Study of the Effectiveness of Additional Reductions in Cholesterol Homocysteine Collaborative Group, Armitage JM, Bowman L, et al. Effects of homocysteine-lowering with folic acid plus vitamin B12 vs placebo on mortality and major morbidity in myocardial infarction survivors: a randomized trial. JAMA 2010;303:2486-94. [PubMed abstract]
    Huo Y, Qin X, Wang J, et al. Efficacy of folic acid supplementation in stroke prevention: new insight from a meta-analysis. Int J Clin Pract 2012;66:544-51. [PubMed abstract]
    Kong X, Huang X, Zhao M, et al. Platelet count affects efficacy of folic acid in preventing first stroke. J Am Coll Cardiol 2018;71:2136-46. [PubMed abstract]
    Stampfer M, Willett W. Folate supplements for stroke prevention: targeted trial trumps the rest. JAMA 2015;313:1321-2. [PubMed abstract]
    Marti-Carvajal AJ, Sola I, Lathyris D, et al. Homocysteine-lowering interventions for preventing cardiovascular events. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2017;8:CD006612. [PubMed abstract]
    Jenkins DJA, Spence JD, Giovannucci EL, et al. Supplemental Vitamins and minerals for CVD prevention and treatment. J Am Coll Cardiol 2018;71:2570-84. [PubMed abstract]
    Tian T, Yang KQ, Cui JG, et al. Folic acid supplementation for stroke prevention in patients with cardiovascular disease. Am J Med Sci 2017;354:379-87. [PubMed abstract]
    Seshadri S, Beiser A, Selhub J, et al. Plasma homocysteine as a risk factor for dementia and Alzheimer's disease. N Engl J Med 2002;346:476-83. [PubMed abstract]
    Ravaglia G, Forti P, Maioli F, et al. Homocysteine and folate as risk factors for dementia and Alzheimer disease. Am J Clin Nutr 2005;82:636-43. [PubMed abstract]
    Clarke R. B-vitamins and prevention of dementia. Proc Nutr Soc 2008;67:75-81. [PubMed abstract]
    Smith AD, Refsum H. Homocysteine, B vitamins, and cognitive impairment. Annu Rev Nutr 2016;36:211-39. [PubMed abstract]
    Smith AD, Refsum H, Bottiglieri T, et al. Homocysteine and dementia: an international consensus statement. J Alzheimers Dis 2018;62:561-70. [PubMed abstract]
    Hooshmand B, Solomon A, Kareholt I, et al. Associations between serum homocysteine, holotranscobalamin, folate and cognition in the elderly: a longitudinal study. J Intern Med 2012;271:204-12. [PubMed abstract]
    Eussen SJ, de Groot LC, Joosten LW, et al. Effect of oral vitamin B-12 with or without folic acid on cognitive function in older people with mild vitamin B-12 deficiency: a randomized, placebo-controlled trial. Am J Clin Nutr 2006;84:361-70. [PubMed abstract]
    van der Zwaluw NL, Dhonukshe-Rutten RA, van Wijngaarden JP, et al. Results of 2-year vitamin B treatment on cognitive performance: secondary data from an RCT. Neurology 2014;83:2158-66. [PubMed abstract]
    Kang JH, Cook N, Manson J, et al. A trial of B vitamins and cognitive function among women at high risk of cardiovascular disease. Am J Clin Nutr 2008;88:1602-10. [PubMed abstract]
    Aisen PS, Schneider LS, Sano M, et al. High-dose B vitamin supplementation and cognitive decline in Alzheimer disease: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2008;300:1774-83. [PubMed abstract]
    Walker JG, Batterham PJ, Mackinnon AJ, et al. Oral folic acid and vitamin B-12 supplementation to prevent cognitive decline in community-dwelling older adults with depressive symptoms--the Beyond Ageing Project: a randomized controlled trial. Am J Clin Nutr 2012;95:194-203. [PubMed abstract]
    Clarke R, Bennett D, Parish S, et al. Effects of homocysteine lowering with B vitamins on cognitive aging: meta-analysis of 11 trials with cognitive data on 22,000 individuals. Am J Clin Nutr 2014;100:657-66. [PubMed abstract]
    Balk EM, Raman G, Tatsioni A, et al. Vitamin B6, B12, and folic acid supplementation and cognitive function: a systematic review of randomized trials. Arch Intern Med 2007;167:21-30. [PubMed abstract]
    Malouf R, Grimley Evans J. Folic acid with or without vitamin B12 for the prevention and treatment of healthy elderly and demented people. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2008:CD004514. [PubMed abstract]
    Dangour AD, Whitehouse PJ, Rafferty K, et al. B-vitamins and fatty acids in the prevention and treatment of Alzheimer's disease and dementia: a systematic review. J Alzheimers Dis 2010;22:205-24. [PubMed abstract]
    Ford AH, Almeida OP. Effect of homocysteine lowering treatment on cognitive function: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. J Alzheimers Dis 2012;29:133-49. [PubMed abstract]
    Durga J, van Boxtel MP, Schouten EG, et al. Effect of 3-year folic acid supplementation on cognitive function in older adults in the FACIT trial: a randomised, double blind, controlled trial. Lancet 2007;369:208-16. [PubMed abstract]
    Huang X, Fan Y, Han X, et al. Association between serum vitamin levels and depression in U.S. adults 20 years or older based on National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 2005-2006. Int J Environ Res Public Health 2018;15. [PubMed abstract]
    Gougeon L, Payette H, Morais JA, et al. Intakes of folate, vitamin B6 and B12 and risk of depression in community-dwelling older adults: the Quebec Longitudinal Study on Nutrition and Aging. Eur J Clin Nutr 2016;70:380-5. [PubMed abstract]
    Morris MS, Fava M, Jacques PF, et al. Depression and folate status in the US population. Psychother Psychosom 2003;72:80-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Papakostas GI, Petersen T, Mischoulon D, et al. Serum folate, vitamin B12, and homocysteine in major depressive disorder, Part 1: predictors of clinical response in fluoxetine-resistant depression. J Clin Psychiatry 2004;65:1090-5. [PubMed abstract]
    Trujillo J, Vieira MC, Lepsch J, et al. A systematic review of the associations between maternal nutritional biomarkers and depression and/or anxiety during pregnancy and postpartum. J Affect Disord 2018;232:185-203. [PubMed abstract]
    Chong MF, Wong JX, Colega M, et al. Relationships of maternal folate and vitamin B12 status during pregnancy with perinatal depression: The GUSTO study. J Psychiatr Res 2014;55:110-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Blunden CH, Inskip HM, Robinson SM, et al. Postpartum depressive symptoms: the B-vitamin link. Ment Health Fam Med 2012;9:5-13. [PubMed abstract]
    Yan J, Liu Y, Cao L, et al. Association between duration of folic acid supplementation during pregnancy and risk of postpartum depression. Nutrients 2017;9. [PubMed abstract]
    Coppen A, Bailey J. Enhancement of the antidepressant action of fluoxetine by folic acid: a randomised, placebo controlled trial. J Affect Disord 2000;60:121-30. [PubMed abstract]
    Bedson E, Bell D, Carr D, et al. Folate Augmentation of Treatment--Evaluation for Depression (FolATED): randomised trial and economic evaluation. Health Technol Assess 2014;18:vii-viii, 1-159. [PubMed abstract]
    Roberts E, Carter B, Young AH. Caveat emptor: Folate in unipolar depressive illness, a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Psychopharmacol 2018;32:377-84. [PubMed abstract]
    Sarris J, Murphy J, Mischoulon D, et al. Adjunctive nutraceuticals for depression: A systematic review and meta-analyses. Am J Psychiatry 2016;173:575-87. [PubMed abstract]
    Cleare A, Pariante CM, Young AH, et al. Evidence-based guidelines for treating depressive disorders with antidepressants: a revision of the 2008 British Association for Psychopharmacology guidelines. J Psychopharmacol 2015;29:459-525. [PubMed abstract]
    Ravindran AV, Balneaves LG, Faulkner G, et al. Canadian Network for Mood and Anxiety Treatments (CANMAT) 2016 clinical guidelines for the management of adults with major depressive disorder: Section 5. Complementary and Alternative medicine treatments. Can J Psychiatry 2016;61:576-87. [PubMed abstract]
    Papakostas GI, Shelton RC, Zajecka JM, et al. L-methylfolate as adjunctive therapy for SSRI-resistant major depression: results of two randomized, double-blind, parallel-sequential trials. Am J Psychiatry 2012;169:1267-74. [PubMed abstract]
    Wilson RD, Genetics C, Motherisk. Pre-conceptional vitamin/folic acid supplementation 2007: the use of folic acid in combination with a multivitamin supplement for the prevention of neural tube defects and other congenital anomalies. J Obstet Gynaecol Can 2007;29:1003-13. [PubMed abstract]
    Pitkin RM. Folate and neural tube defects. Am J Clin Nutr 2007;85:285S-8S. [PubMed abstract]
    Williams J, Mai CT, Mulinare J, et al. Updated estimates of neural tube defects prevented by mandatory folic Acid fortification - United States, 1995-2011. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2015;64:1-5. [PubMed abstract]
    Lamers Y. Folate recommendations for pregnancy, lactation, and infancy. Ann Nutr Metab 2011;59:32-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Scott JM. Evidence of folic acid and folate in the prevention of neural tube defects. Bibl Nutr Dieta 2001:192-5. [PubMed abstract]
    Molloy AM, Kirke PN, Brody LC, et al. Effects of folate and vitamin B12 deficiencies during pregnancy on fetal, infant, and child development. Food Nutr Bull 2008;29:S101-11; discussion S12-5. [PubMed abstract]
    Williams LJ, Rasmussen SA, Flores A, et al. Decline in the prevalence of spina bifida and anencephaly by race/ethnicity: 1995-2002. Pediatrics 2005;116:580-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Rader JI, Schneeman BO. Prevalence of neural tube defects, folate status, and folate fortification of enriched cereal-grain products in the United States. Pediatrics 2006;117:1394-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Dary O. Nutritional interpretation of folic acid interventions. Nutr Rev 2009;67:235-44. [PubMed abstract]
    Shane B. Folate-responsive birth defects: of mice and women. Am J Clin Nutr 2012;95:1-2. [PubMed abstract]
    Viswanathan M, Treiman KA, Kish-Doto J, et al. Folic acid supplementation for the prevention of neural tube defects: an updated evidence report and systematic review for the US Preventive Services Task Force. JAMA 2017;317:190-203. [PubMed abstract]
    Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Use of folic acid for prevention of spina bifida and other neural tube defects--1983-1991. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 1991;40:513-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Czeizel AE, Puho EH, Langmar Z, et al. Possible association of folic acid supplementation during pregnancy with reduction of preterm birth: a population-based study. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 2010;148:135-40. [PubMed abstract]
    Liu S, Joseph KS, Luo W, et al. Effect of folic acid food fortification in Canada on congenital heart disease subtypes. Circulation 2016;134:647-55. [PubMed abstract]
    Botto LD, Mulinare J, Erickson JD. Occurrence of congenital heart defects in relation to maternal mulitivitamin use. Am J Epidemiol 2000;151:878-84. [PubMed abstract]
    Shaw GM, O'Malley CD, Wasserman CR, et al. Maternal periconceptional use of multivitamins and reduced risk for conotruncal heart defects and limb deficiencies among offspring. Am J Med Genet 1995;59:536-45. [PubMed abstract]
    Johnson MA. If high folic acid aggravates vitamin B12 deficiency what should be done about it? Nutr Rev 2007;65:451-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Morris MS, Jacques PF, Rosenberg IH,et al. Folate and vitamin B-12 status in relation to anemia, macrocytosis, and cognitive impairment in older Americans in the age of folic acid fortification. Am J Clin Nutr 2007;85:193-200. [PubMed abstract]
    Selhub J, Morris MS, Jacques PF. In vitamin B12 deficiency, higher serum folate is associated with increased total homocysteine and methylmalonic acid concentrations. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2007;104:19995-20000. [PubMed abstract]
    Selhub J, Morris MS, Jacques PF, et al. Folate-vitamin B-12 interaction in relation to cognitive impairment, anemia, and biochemical indicators of vitamin B-12 deficiency. Am J Clin Nutr 2009;89:702S-6S. [PubMed abstract]
    Berry RJ, Carter HK, Yang Q. Cognitive impairment in older Americans in the age of folic acid fortification. Am J Clin Nutr 2007;86:265-7; author reply 7-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Carmel R. Does high folic acid intake affect unrecognized cobalamin deficiency, and how will we know it if we see it? Am J Clin Nutr 2009;90:1449-50. [PubMed abstract]
    Valera-Gran D, Navarrete-Munoz EM, Garcia de la Hera M, Fernandez-Somoano A, Tardon A, Ibarluzea J, et al. Effect of maternal high dosages of folic acid supplements on neurocognitive development in children at 4-5 y of age: the prospective birth cohort Infancia y Medio Ambiente (INMA) study. Am J Clin Nutr 2017;106:878-87. [PubMed abstract]
    Troen AM, Mitchell B, Sorensen B, et al. Unmetabolized folic acid in plasma is associated with reduced natural killer cell cytotoxicity among postmenopausal women. J Nutr 2006;136:189-94. [PubMed abstract]
    Morris MS, Jacques PF, Rosenberg IH, Selhub J. Circulating unbetabolied folic acid and 5-methyltetrahydrofolate in relation to anemia, macrocytosis, and cognitive test performance in American seniors. Am J Clin Nutr. 2010 Jun;91(6):1733-44. [PubMed abstract]
    Pfeiffer CM, Sternberg MR, Fazili Z, et al. Unmetabolized folic acid is detected in nearly all serum samples from US children, adolescents, and adults. J Nutr 2015;145:520-31. [PubMed abstract]
    Stamm RA, March KM, Karakochuk CD, et al. Lactating Canadian women consuming 1000 µg folic acid daily have high circulating serum folic acid above a threshold concentration of serum total folate. J Nutr 2018;148:1103-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Page R, Robichaud A, Arbuckle TE, et al. Total folate and unmetabolized folic acid in the breast milk of a cross-section of Canadian women. Am J Clin Nutr 2017;105:1101-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Obeid R, Kasoha M, Kirsch SH, et al. Concentrations of unmetabolized folic acid and primary folate forms in pregnant women at delivery and in umbilical cord blood. Am J Clin Nutr 2010;92:1416-22. [PubMed abstract]
    Plumptre L, Masih SP, Ly A, et al. High concentrations of folate and unmetabolized folic acid in a cohort of pregnant Canadian women and umbilical cord blood. Am J Clin Nutr 2015;102:848-57. [PubMed abstract]
    Sweeney MR, McPartlin J, Scott J. Folic acid fortification and public health: report on threshold doses above which unmetabolised folic acid appear in serum. BMC Public Health 2007;7:41. [PubMed abstract]
    Kelly P, McPartlin J, Goggins M, et al. Unmetabolized folic acid in serum: acute studies in subjects consuming fortified food and supplements. Am J Clin Nutr 1997;65:1790-5. [PubMed abstract]
    Sweeney MR, McPartlin J, Weir DG, et al. Postprandial serum folic acid response to multiple doses of folic acid in fortified bread. Br J Nutr 2006;95:145-51. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Guidance for Industry: A Food Labeling Guide (14. Appendix F: Calculate the Percent Daily Value for the Appropriate Nutrients). 2013.
    Natural Medicines. Folate. 2018.
    Duhra P. Treatment of gastrointestinal symptoms associated with methotrexate therapy for psoriasis. J Am Acad Dermatol 1993;28:466-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Ortiz Z, Shea B, Suarez Almazor M, et al. Folic acid and folinic acid for reducing side effects in patients receiving methotrexate for rheumatoid arthritis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2000:CD000951. [PubMed abstract]
    Linnebank M, Moskau S, Semmler A, et al. Antiepileptic drugs interact with folate and vitamin B12 serum levels. Ann Neurol 2011;69:352-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Halsted CH, Gandhi G, Tamura T. Sulfasalazine inhibits the absorption of folates in ulcerative colitis. N Engl J Med 1981;305:1513-7. [PubMed abstract]

Disclaimer

This fact sheet by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Office of Dietary Supplements (ODS) provides information that should not take the place of medical advice. We encourage you to talk to your health care providers (doctor, registered dietitian, pharmacist, etc.) about your interest in, questions about, or use of dietary supplements and what may be best for your overall health. Any mention in this publication of a specific product or service, or recommendation from an organization or professional society, does not represent an endorsement by ODS of that product, service, or expert advice.

Updated: November 30, 2022


 Dietary Supplements for Immune Function and Infectious Diseases: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals (original version)
Dietary Supplements for Immune Function and Infectious Diseases: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals
Table of Contents

    Introduction
    Vitamins and Minerals
    Vitamins
    Vitamin A
    Vitamin C
    Vitamin D
    Vitamin E
    Minerals
    Selenium
    Zinc
    Botanicals
    Andrographis
    Echinacea
    Elderberry (European Elder)
    Garlic
    Ginseng
    Tea and tea catechins
    Other Ingredients
    Glutamine
    N-acetylcysteine and Glutathione
    Omega-3 fatty acids
    Probiotics
    References
    Disclaimer

Introduction

Interest in dietary supplement ingredients that might enhance immune function and reduce the risk of infectious diseases is high, especially after the emergence of COVID-19.

The immune system defends the body from pathogens that cause disease and is comprised of innate responses, which are the first line of defense, and adaptive responses, which become engaged later [1-3].

The innate immune system includes physical barriers, such as the skin and gut epithelium, that help prevent pathogen entry. It also includes leukocytes (white blood cells)—such as neutrophils, macrophages (which release cytokines), and natural killer cells—that attempt to find and eliminate foreign pathogens. However, these components are nonspecific, meaning that unlike the adaptive immune system, they do not recognize and respond to specific pathogens [1,2,4].

The adaptive immune system consists of B lymphocytes (B cells) that secrete antibodies (a process known as humoral immunity) and T lymphocytes, which are also known as T cells (a process known as cell-mediated immunity), both of which are pathogen specific [3-5]. The adaptive response takes several days or weeks to develop, but it generates immunological memory; as a result, a subsequent exposure to the same pathogen leads to a vigorous and rapid immune response [1,3,5]. Vaccinations stimulate the adaptive immune system, protecting the body from future exposures [2].

The body’s immune response to pathogens can lead to inflammation, causing redness, swelling, heat, pain, and possible loss of tissue function [6]. Inflammation helps eliminate the pathogen and initiate the healing process, but it can also cause symptoms and severe pathologies [6,7]. For example, activation of CD8 T cells as part of the adaptive immune response can increase inflammation and cause pulmonary damage. This process can lead to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), which has occurred in some patients with COVID-19 [7].

Consuming adequate amounts of several vitamins and minerals—including vitamin A, vitamin C, vitamin D, vitamin E, selenium, and zinc—is important for proper immune function, and clinical deficiencies of these nutrients weaken immunity and can increase susceptibility to infections [2,4,5,8-10]. Other ingredients (whether provided through foods or dietary supplements), such as botanicals and probiotics, are not essential in the body but might affect immune function.

Measuring the impact of dietary supplement ingredients, such as vitamins, minerals, or other substances, on the immune system is difficult because the immune system is a complex network of organs, tissues, and cells [11,12]. No single, straightforward measure of immune system function and resistance to disease exists. Indirectly, immune function can be assessed by examining a person's risk and severity of infectious diseases.

This fact sheet summarizes the effects of various dietary supplement ingredients on immune function and the risk of selected infectious diseases, including the common cold, influenza and other respiratory tract infections, infectious diarrhea, and HIV infection. These diseases can be caused by numerous pathogens. For example, the common cold is caused by a wide variety of respiratory viruses, most commonly rhinovirus, but also coronaviruses, adenoviruses, and other virus serotypes [13].

Dietary supplement ingredients in each category are presented in alphabetical order. In some cases, cited research involves intravenous, enteral, or parenteral administration. Dietary ingredients administered by these routes are not classified as dietary supplements, but the information is included for completeness.

For information on dietary supplements and COVID-19, please see the Office of Dietary Supplements (ODS) health professional fact sheet, Dietary Supplements in the Time of COVID-19.
Vitamins and Minerals

Consuming a nutritious variety of foods helps maintain overall good health and a strong immune system [14]. Obtaining adequate amounts of vitamins and minerals is also important for good health, and deficiencies of certain vitamins and minerals—including vitamins A, B6, B12, C, D, E, and K; folate; and copper, iodine, iron, magnesium, selenium, and zinc—might adversely affect immune function.

Examples involving vitamins are as follows:

    Folate deficiency affects thymus and spleen function and decreases T-lymphocyte levels, and vitamin B12 deficiency decreases the phagocytic capacity of neutrophils [15].
    Vitamin A deficiency is associated with increased susceptibility to infections, altered immune responses, and an impaired ability of epithelial tissue to act as a barrier to pathogens [5,8,15].
    Vitamin E deficiency impairs humoral and cell-mediated immunity and is associated with reduced natural killer cell activity [16-18].

Examples involving minerals are as follows:

    Copper deficiency is associated with altered immune responses and an increased risk of infection, especially in infants and older adults [16,19,20].
    Low magnesium status is associated with decreased immune cell activity, increased oxidative stress, and increased inflammation, including increased levels of some inflammatory cytokines, such as interleukin-6 [21-26].
    Selenium deficiency might adversely affect immune response as well as the pathogenicity of viruses [5,10,27].

The European Society for Clinical Nutrition and Metabolism states that low intakes or status of several micronutrients—including vitamins A, E, B6, and B12; zinc; and selenium—are associated with worse outcomes in patients with viral infections [14]. If needed, vitamin and mineral supplementation can boost intakes to recommended levels. In the absence of deficiency, however, routine supplementation with micronutrients probably does little to prevent or treat specific infections [14,28].

The following subsections describe research on the effects of dietary supplements containing more commonly studied vitamins and minerals—vitamins A, C, D, and E, selenium, and zinc—on immune function.
Vitamins
Vitamin A

Many foods contain vitamin A, an essential nutrient. Two sources of vitamin A are available in the human diet: preformed vitamin A (retinol and retinyl esters) and provitamin A carotenoids (beta-carotene, alpha-carotene, and beta-cryptoxanthin). Preformed vitamin A is present in foods from animal sources, including dairy products, eggs, fish, and organ meats. Provitamin A carotenoids come from plant foods, including leafy green vegetables, orange and yellow vegetables, tomato products, fruits, and some vegetable oils. The Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA) for vitamin A is 300 to 1,200 mcg retinol activity equivalents (RAE) for infants and children, depending on age, and 700 to 1,300 mcg RAE for adults, including women who are pregnant or lactating [29].

Vitamin A plays a critical role in vision and growth. It is also required for the formation and maintenance of epithelial tissue and the differentiation, maturation, and function of macrophages and other cells of the innate immune system [5,15,30]. Vitamin A’s impact on adaptive immunity is less clear, but it is involved in the maturation of CD4+ T cells, the function of B cells, and the regulation of inflammatory cytokines [5,15]. Vitamin A deficiency is associated with increased susceptibility to infections, altered immune responses, and impairment in the ability of epithelial tissue to act as a barrier to pathogens [5,15,30,31].

Although vitamin A deficiency is rare in the United States, it is common in many low- and middle-income countries and is one of the top causes of preventable blindness in children [32-36]. It is also associated with an increased risk of respiratory diseases, diarrhea, and measles. For this reason, the World Health Organization (WHO) and other expert groups recommend universal vitamin A supplementation for children younger than 5 years (including those who have HIV) in populations with a high risk of vitamin A deficiency [33,37]. Recommended doses in these populations are 30,000 mcg RAE (100,000 International Units [IU]) vitamin A once for infants age 6–11 months and 60,000 mcg RAE (200,000 IU) every 4–6 months for children age 1–5 years [37]. The authors of a 2022 analysis concluded that vitamin A supplementation has reduced child mortality rates in sub-Saharan Africa, although rates are still substantial in many countries in this region [38].
Efficacy
Diarrhea in children

Vitamin A deficiency can decrease resistance to pathogens in the mucosa of the digestive tract and increase the risk of diarrhea [30]. Vitamin A deficiency also increases the risk of mortality from diarrhea in young children [39]. A 2015 analysis of data from 83 countries found that 94,500 deaths from diarrhea in children were associated with vitamin A deficiency [39]. In addition, more than 95% of these deaths occurred in sub-Saharan Africa and south Asia.

For these reasons, researchers have examined the effects of vitamin A supplementation on childhood diarrhea. Results from these studies suggest that vitamin A supplementation reduces the risk and severity of diarrhea in children in low- and middle-income countries but does not appear to benefit very young infants.

A 2011 systematic review of studies that examined the effects of vitamin A on childhood diarrhea included 13 clinical trials in a total of 37,710 participants that examined risk of diarrhea and 7 clinical trials in a total of 90,951 children age 6 months to 5 years, mostly in low- or middle-income countries, that examined the risk of death from diarrhea [40]. Vitamin A doses ranged from 6,000 mcg RAE (20,000 IU) to 61,800 mcg RAE (206,000 IU), depending on age, and were administered in a single dose or in several doses administered weekly or every few months for up to 24 months. Vitamin A supplementation decreased the risk of diarrhea by 15% and the risk of death due to diarrhea by 28%. Similarly, a 2022 Cochrane Review that included 15 clinical trials in a total of 77,946 children age 6 months to 5 years found that 15,000 mcg RAE (50,000 IU) to 60,000 mcg RAE (200,000 IU) vitamin A, depending on age, reduced the risk of diarrhea by 15% [33]. In addition, results from 9 studies in a total of 1,098,538 children showed that vitamin A reduced the risk of death due to diarrhea by 12%.

In very young infants, however, limited evidence suggests that vitamin A supplementation does not affect diarrhea morbidity or mortality. A 2016 Cochrane Review that examined the effects of vitamin A supplementation in children age 1 to 6 months found that 7,500 mcg RAE (25,000 IU) to 15,000 mcg RAE (50,000 IU) vitamin A administered three times during the first few months of life did not reduce the risk of diarrhea or of death due to diarrhea [41]. However, these findings were based on only two clinical trials that examined the incidence of diarrhea in 5,183 participants and one trial that examined mortality from diarrhea in 210 participants.
HIV infection

HIV infection can lower appetite and impair the body’s absorption and use of nutrients. It can also increase the risk of comorbidities, including diarrhea and respiratory diseases [42]. HIV progression can be measured by CD4+ T-cell counts; lower cell counts indicate more advanced disease, and a count below 200 cells/microliter (mcL) indicates AIDS [43]. HIV is treated with a combination of medicines called antiretroviral therapy (ART), which can reduce the risk of HIV transmission from one individual to another by reducing viral load and help people with HIV live longer [44].

The results of studies of the effects of vitamin A supplementation on risk of HIV transmission or disease outcomes in children and adults have been mixed.

Two Cochrane Reviews found that vitamin A supplements improved some but not all outcomes examined in children but offered no benefit in adults with HIV infection. A 2013 Cochrane Review included three clinical trials in a total of 262 infants and children with HIV age 5 years or younger [45]. It found that vitamin A supplementation (15,000 mcg RAE [50,000 IU] to 60,000 mcg RAE [200,000 IU], depending on age, administered up to four times per year) reduced the risk of all-cause mortality by 45% but had inconsistent effects on the risk of diarrhea or respiratory infections. Another Cochrane Review examined the effects of vitamin A supplementation in four clinical trials that included a total of 919 adults with HIV infection (mostly women age 18 to 45) [46]. This review found that 90,000 mcg RAE (180,000 mcg) beta-carotene or 3,000 mcg RAE (10,000 IU) vitamin A supplementation daily for 4 to 6 weeks or a single dose of 60,000 mcg RAE (200,000 IU) or 90,000 mcg RAE (300,000 IU) vitamin A did not have clinically significant effects on CD4+ T-cell counts or viral load. None of the trials was adequately powered to assess mortality or morbidity outcomes.

Results were negative in another 2017 Cochrane Review [47]. It included five clinical trials conducted in sub-Saharan Africa with a total of 7,298 pregnant women with HIV. Participants took vitamin A daily during pregnancy (3,000 mcg RAE [10,000 IU] or 1,500 mcg RAE [5,000 IU] plus 30 mg beta-carotene), a single dose immediately after delivery (60,000 to 120,000 mcg RAE [200,000 to 400,000 IU] to the mother and/or 15,000 mcg RAE [50,000 IU] to the newborn), or both. Vitamin A supplementation did not affect the risk of mother-to-child transmission of HIV. Largely because of the findings from this analysis, the WHO does not recommend vitamin A supplementation in women with HIV who are pregnant in order to reduce the risk of mother-to-child transmission of HIV [48].

Most of the findings were also negative in a 2022 systematic review of vitamin A supplementation that included 17 clinical trials, conducted mostly in sub-Saharan Africa, in a total of 12,585 children and adults (mostly pregnant women) with HIV [31]. Vitamin A dosing schedules varied widely but commonly included 1,500 to 3,000 mcg RAE (5,000 to 10,000 IU) daily or one-time doses of 15,000 to 120,000 mcg RAE (50,000 to 400,000 IU) at baseline or delivery. Vitamin A supplementation did not affect viral load, CD4+ or CD8+ T-cell counts, or interleukin-1b levels. In addition, it did not affect rates of gastrointestinal and HIV symptoms. However, in one trial included in the review, vitamin A supplementation (120,000 mcg RAE [400,000 IU] at delivery) reduced the number of clinic visits for some health conditions in women with HIV postpartum and in another trial, supplementation with 15,000 to 60,000 mcg RAE (50,000 to 200,000 IU) vitamin A (depending on age) five times per year reduced rates of diarrhea in children with HIV. Supplements (1,500 mcg RAE [5,000 IU] daily plus 60,000 mcg RAE [200,000 IU] at delivery) also reduced the risk of preterm birth in one study in pregnant women with HIV.

Whether maternal vitamin A supplementation affects the morbidity and mortality of breastfed infants was the focus of a cross-sectional study in lactating women with HIV from sub-Saharan Africa [49]. The study included 838 mothers, 309 of whom took vitamin A supplements after giving birth (doses and frequency not reported); the other 529 did not. Vitamin A supplementation did not affect infant mortality rates or the risk of cough with difficulty breathing, diarrhea, or fever in the breastfed infants.
Measles in children

In 2023, measles was responsible for about 107,500 deaths worldwide, mostly in young children in low-income countries [50]. Vitamin A deficiency, which is rare in the United States, is a risk factor for severe measles [5,39]. A WHO analysis of data from 83 countries showed that 11,200 child deaths from measles were associated with vitamin A deficiency in 2013, and more than 95% of these deaths occurred in sub-Saharan Africa and south Asia [39].

Research suggests that vitamin A supplementation reduces the risk of measles in children who are at high risk of vitamin A deficiency. However, vitamin A supplementation does not appear to reduce the risk of death from measles. A 2022 Cochrane Review included six clinical trials that examined the effect of vitamin A supplementation on the risk of measles in children [33]. These studies enrolled a total of 19,566 children age 6 months to 5 years who lived in low- and middle-income countries. Vitamin A doses ranged from 15,000 mcg RAE (50,000 IU) to 60,000 mcg RAE (200,000 IU), depending on age. Supplements were administered as a single dose or every 4 to 6 months. Vitamin A supplementation reduced the risk of new cases of measles by 50%. However, the same Cochrane Review found that vitamin A supplementation did not affect the risk of death due to measles, based on the results from six clinical trials in a total of 1,088,261 children.
Pneumonia and other respiratory tract infections in children

Vitamin A deficiency is associated with recurrent respiratory tract infections in children [33,51]. However, findings have been mixed from trials of the effects of vitamin A supplementation on the risk and severity of pneumonia and other respiratory tract infections in children [33,52]. In addition, some evidence suggests that doses of vitamin A supplementation that are higher than the WHO recommends might increase the risk of respiratory tract infections among children with normal nutritional status [53].

Effects were mixed in a meta-analysis of 15 clinical trials in a total of 3,021 children (age not specified) that examined the effects of 450 mcg RAE (1,500 IU) to 120,000 mcg RAE (400,000 IU) vitamin A supplementation for several days or weeks on the risk of morbidity and mortality from pneumonia [52]. Vitamin A supplementation shortened the durations of hospital stays and of signs and symptoms, including fever, cough, and abnormal chest X-rays. However, it did not reduce the risk of death due to pneumonia.

Other clinical trials have found that vitamin A supplements do not reduce the risk of respiratory tract infections or of death from these infections. A 2022 Cochrane Review that included 11 clinical trials in a total of 27,540 children age 6 months to 5 years found that 15,000 mcg RAE (50,000 IU) to 60,000 mcg RAE (200,000 IU), depending on age, vitamin A supplementation did not significantly affect the risk of lower respiratory tract infections [33]. In addition, vitamin A supplements did not affect the risk of death due to these infections, according to the results of nine studies in a total of 1,098,538 children that examined this outcome. A separate Cochrane Review also found that vitamin A supplementation (7,500 mcg RAE [25,000 IU] or 15,000 mcg RAE [50,000 IU] given three times during the first 14 weeks of life) did not reduce the risk of respiratory tract infections or death due to such infections in very young infants age 1 to 6 months, although the review included only one trial for each outcome [41]. Similarly, a 2022 systematic review of 16 clinical trials that combined nine trials in a meta-analysis in a total of 32,129 children found that vitamin A supplementation did not reduce the risk of respiratory tract infections [54].

Another meta-analysis found that taking vitamin A supplements to reduce the risk of respiratory tract infections might even be harmful in some circumstances [53]. The analysis included 26 clinical trials that examined acute or lower respiratory tract infections in a total of 50,994 children from birth to age 11 years. Vitamin A doses ranged from 15,000 mcg RAE (50,000 IU) to 370,800 mcg RAE (1,236,000 IU) depending on age and were administered as a single dose or over days, weeks, months, or years. Overall, vitamin A supplementation did not affect the risk, severity, or duration of acute or lower respiratory tract infections. However, in subgroup analyses, higher-than-standard vitamin A doses (more than 30,000 mcg RAE [100,000 IU] for children up to 11 months of age and more than 60,000 mcg RAE [200,000 IU] every 4 to 6 months for children age 12 months to 11 years) increased the risk of acute respiratory tract infections by 66% in participants with normal nutritional status, but these doses did not affect this risk in participants with stunted and wasted nutritional status.
Safety

Up to 600 to 2,800 mcg/day preformed vitamin A in foods and dietary supplements is safe for children, depending on age, and up to 3,000 mcg/day is safe for adults, including women who are pregnant or lactating [29]. These tolerable upper intake levels (ULs, maximum daily intake unlikely to cause adverse health effects), however, do not apply to people taking vitamin A under the care of a physician.

Higher intakes can cause severe headache, blurred vision, nausea, dizziness, aching muscles, and coordination problems. In severe cases, cerebral spinal fluid pressure can increase, leading to drowsiness and, eventually, coma [55]. Regular consumption of high doses of preformed vitamin A from foods or supplements can cause dry skin, painful muscles and joints, fatigue, depression, and abnormal liver test results. High intakes of preformed vitamin A can also cause congenital birth defects [35].

Unlike preformed vitamin A, beta-carotene is not known to be teratogenic or lead to reproductive toxicity. Therefore, beta-carotene does not have an established UL [56].

Vitamin A might interact with some medications. For example, orlistat, a weight-loss medication, can decrease the absorption of vitamin A, resulting in low plasma levels in some patients [57]. In addition, synthetic retinoids derived from vitamin A that are used as oral prescription medicines, such as acitretin used to treat psoriasis, increase the risk of hypervitaminosis A when taken in combination with vitamin A supplements [57].

More information on vitamin A is available in the ODS health professional fact sheet on vitamin A.
Vitamin C

Vitamin C, also called ascorbic acid, is an essential nutrient contained in many fruits and vegetables, including citrus fruits, tomatoes, potatoes, red and green peppers, kiwifruit, broccoli, strawberries, brussels sprouts, and cantaloupe. The RDA for vitamin C is 15 to 115 mg for infants and children, depending on age, and 75 to 120 mg for nonsmoking adults, including women who are pregnant or lactating; people who smoke need 35 mg more per day [56].

Vitamin C plays an important role in both innate and adaptive immunity, probably because of its antioxidant effects, antimicrobial and antiviral actions, and effects on immune system modulators [5,32,58-62]. Vitamin C helps maintain epithelial integrity, enhance the differentiation and proliferation of B cells and T cells, enhance phagocytosis, normalize cytokine production, and decrease histamine levels [4,5,60]. It might also inhibit viral replication [13].

Vitamin C deficiency impairs immune function and increases susceptibility to infections [5,58,60]. Some research suggests that supplemental vitamin C enhances immune function [63], but its effects might vary depending on an individual’s vitamin C status [64].

Vitamin C deficiency is uncommon in the United States, affecting only about 7% of individuals age 6 years and older [65]. People who smoke and those whose diets include a limited variety of foods (such as some older adults and people with alcohol or drug use disorders) are more likely than others to obtain insufficient amounts of vitamin C [61,63].
Efficacy
Common cold

Vitamin C’s antioxidant action might help reduce oxidative stress during infections. In addition, regular consumption of vitamin C might reduce the duration of the common cold and the severity of its symptoms, but taking vitamin C supplements only after symptom onset does not provide consistent benefits [5,59].

Several clinical trials have examined whether vitamin C supplementation reduces the risk of developing the common cold in the general population and those exposed to extreme physical stress. One trial included 92 runners and a control group of 92 nonrunners (mostly male, age 25 years or older) who took 600 mg per day vitamin C or placebo for 21 days before a 90-kilometer ultramarathon [66]. During the 2 weeks after the race, 68% of the runners who took a placebo but only 33% of those who took vitamin C reported developing an upper respiratory tract infection. Among nonrunners, however, the incidence of upper respiratory tract infections was not different between supplement and placebo users. In addition, the duration of symptoms in nonrunners who took vitamin C was shorter (mean 4.2 days) than in those who took a placebo (5.6 days), but symptom duration did not differ between the runners who took vitamin C and those who took a placebo.

A 2013 Cochrane Review included 29 clinical trials (including the one described above) that examined the effects of vitamin C supplementation in 11,306 participants [13]. Most trials had participants from the general population, but five trials involved 598 people exposed to extreme physical stress, including marathon runners, skiers, and soldiers in subarctic areas. Taking 200 mg/day or more vitamin C regularly did not affect the risk of developing the common cold in the general population. However, among people exposed to extreme physical stress, vitamin C supplementation reduced the risk of developing a cold by 52%. In addition, regular use of vitamin C supplements shortened the duration of colds by about 8% in adults and about 14% in children; it also reduced cold severity. The authors noted that extreme physical stress generates oxidative stress, and the antioxidant action of vitamin C might help counteract this effect in people exposed to this type of physical stress [13].

Findings were positive in a 2021 systematic review and meta-analysis that included 24 clinical trials in a total of 10,961 adults [67]. Daily doses of vitamin C ranged from less than 250 mg to 2,000 mg for 5 days to 5 years. The supplementation reduced the risk of the common cold and other acute respiratory infections by 4%. However, effects differed by sex, with an 18% reduced risk among men, but no significant effect among women. Vitamin C supplementation also shortened the duration of symptoms by 9%.

Some evidence suggests that vitamin C supplementation might be more effective in people with low vitamin C status [64]. For example, a 2014 clinical trial included 28 healthy, nonsmoking men age 18 to 35 years who took 1,000 mg vitamin C or placebo daily for 8 weeks during the peak of the cold season, January through April [68]. Approximately half of the participants had either inadequate (less than 28 mcmol/L) or deficient (less than 11 mcmol/L) plasma vitamin C concentrations. Participants who took vitamin C had a 45% lower risk of developing the common cold than those who took placebo.
Sepsis (vitamin C administered intravenously, not as a dietary supplement)

Sepsis is a life-threatening condition that occurs when the body’s extreme inflammatory response to an infection causes widespread organ and tissue damage. Some researchers believe that high-dose intravenous vitamin C (which is classified as a drug in the United States) might mitigate the damage caused by sepsis, but evidence from clinical trials is mixed, and some evidence suggests that this treatment may cause harm.

Evidence on the potential harms of intravenous vitamin C for sepsis comes from a 2022 clinical trial in Canada, France, and New Zealand that included 872 men and women (mean age 65 years) with an infection who were in the intensive care unit (ICU) for 24 hours or less and were treated with vasopressor medications [69]. Patients received an infusion of vitamin C (50 mg/kg) or placebo every 6 hours for up to 96 hours. On day 28, those treated with intravenous vitamin C had a higher risk of death or organ dysfunction than those treated with a placebo.

Other trials have had mixed findings. For example, in a clinical trial in 167 ICU patients (mean age 55 years) with sepsis and ARDS for less than 24 hours, 50 mg/kg every 6 hours for 96 hours intravenous vitamin C did not improve organ dysfunction scores or markers of inflammation and vascular injury compared with placebo [70]. However, patients treated with intravenous vitamin C had a lower risk of 28-day all-cause mortality.

Two 2022 systematic reviews and meta-analyses that examined the effects of intravenous vitamin C in critically ill patients also had mixed findings [71,72]. One of these analyses included 15 clinical trials (including the 2019 trial described above but not the 2022 trial) in a total of 2,490 patients that administered high-dose intravenous vitamin C (10,000 mg/day or more, which is equal to about 33 mg/kg every 6 hours for a 165-pound person) and low dose (less than 10,000 mg/day) [71]. In some studies, intravenous vitamin C was combined with thiamin and hydrocortisone. Vitamin C infusion did not affect overall mortality risk. However, high-dose intravenous vitamin C reduced overall mortality rates by 30%, whereas low dose intravenous vitamin C did not. The other analysis included 17 trials that administered less than 6,000 mg/day to more than 12,000 mg/day intravenous vitamin C, sometimes in combination with thiamin, glucocorticoids, or both [72]. The intravenous vitamin C did not affect organ dysfunction, length of ICU stay, or risk of death 90 days to 1 year after study enrollment.
Safety

Up to 400 to 1,800 mg/day vitamin C from foods and dietary supplements is safe for children, depending on age, and up to 2,000 mg/day is safe for adults, including women who are pregnant or lactating [56]. These ULs, however, do not apply to people taking vitamin C under the care of a physician.

Higher vitamin C intakes can cause diarrhea, nausea, and abdominal cramps. High intakes might also cause falsely high or low readings on some blood glucose meters that are used to monitor glucose levels in people with diabetes [73-75]. In people with hemochromatosis, high doses of vitamin C could exacerbate iron overload and damage body tissues [56,61].The Food and Nutrition Board of the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine recommends that people with hemochromatosis be cautious about consuming vitamin C doses above the RDA [56].

Vitamin C supplementation might interact with some medications. For example, it might reduce the effectiveness of radiation therapy and chemotherapy by protecting tumor cells from the action of these agents [76]. Vitamin C might also enhance the absorption of levothyroxine when taken at the same time [77].

More information on vitamin C is available in the ODS health professional fact sheet on vitamin C.

For information on vitamin C and COVID-19, please see the ODS health professional fact sheet, Dietary Supplements in the Time of COVID-19.
Vitamin D

Vitamin D exists in two forms: vitamin D2 and vitamin D3. It is an essential nutrient that is naturally present in only a few foods, such as fatty fish (including salmon and tuna) and fish liver oils. In addition, beef liver, cheese, and egg yolks contain small amounts. Fortified foods, especially fortified milk, provide most of the vitamin D in the diets of people in the United States. The RDA for vitamin D is 10 to 15 mcg (400 IU to 600 IU) for children, depending on age, and 15 to 20 mcg (600 to 800 IU) for adults, including women who are pregnant or lactating [78]. The body can also synthesize vitamin D as a result of sun exposure.

Vitamin D obtained from sun exposure, foods, and supplements is biologically inert until it undergoes two hydroxylations in the body for activation. The first hydroxylation, which occurs in the liver, converts vitamin D to 25-hydroxyvitamin D [25(OH)D]. The second hydroxylation occurs primarily in the kidney and forms the physiologically active 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D [1,25(OH)2D].

Serum concentration of 25(OH)D is the main indicator of vitamin D status [78]. Although researchers have not definitively identified serum concentrations of 25(OH)D associated with deficiency and adequacy, the Food and Nutrition Board advises that levels below 30 nmol/L (12 ng/mL) are associated with vitamin D deficiency, and levels of 50 nmol/L (20 ng/mL) or more are considered adequate for bone and overall health in most people [78]. However, 25(OH)D levels defined as deficient or adequate vary from study to study.

In addition to its well-known effects on calcium absorption and bone health, vitamin D plays a role in immune function [5,58,79-82]. Vitamin D appears to lower viral replication rates, suppress inflammation, and increase levels of T-regulatory cells and their activity [16,58,83-88]. In addition, almost all immune cells (e.g., B lymphocytes and T lymphocytes) express the vitamin D receptor, and some immune cells (e.g., macrophages and dendritic cells) can convert 25(OH)D to the active 1,25(OH)2D form. These capabilities suggest that vitamin D can modulate both innate and adaptive immune responses [5,16,80-82,85,87,88].

Vitamin D deficiency affects the body’s susceptibility to infection, partly by weakening tissue barriers, and has been associated with an increased risk of influenza and other respiratory tract infections, hepatitis C, HIV, and other viral infections [5,14,81,89]. It also impairs macrophage function and interleukin-10 production [5].

Dietary surveys indicate that most people in the United States consume less than recommended amounts of vitamin D [90]. Nevertheless, according to a 2011–2014 analysis of serum 25(OH)D concentrations, most people in the United States age 1 year and older have adequate vitamin D status [91]. Sun exposure, which increases serum 25(OH)D levels, is one of the reasons serum 25(OH)D levels are usually higher than would be predicted on the basis of dietary vitamin D intakes alone [78].
Efficacy
Influenza, pneumonia, and other respiratory tract infections

Researchers have investigated whether higher vitamin D status can reduce the risk of seasonal infections, having observed that low vitamin D status (due to less sun exposure) and higher risk of upper respiratory tract infections are more common in the winter [87,92]. An analysis of data on the association between 25(OH)D levels and recent upper respiratory tract infections in 18,883 participants age 12 years and older from the third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (1988–1994) suggests that lower vitamin D levels are associated with a higher risk of respiratory tract infections [93]. In this analysis, 24% of participants with 25(OH)D levels less than 10 ng/mL reported recent upper respiratory tract infections. In contrast, only 20% of participants with levels of 10 to less than 30 ng/mL and 17% of those with levels of 30 ng/mL or higher reported recent upper respiratory tract infections. In another analysis, vitamin D insufficiency and deficiency were associated with a higher mortality risk from respiratory diseases than vitamin D sufficiency during 15 years of follow-up in 9,548 adults age 50–75 years in Germany [94].

Results from clinicals trials have been mixed but suggest that vitamin D supplementation might modestly reduce the risk of respiratory tract infections. For example, in a clinical trial in Japan, 430 children age 6 to 15 years took 30 mcg (1,200 IU) vitamin D3 or placebo daily during 4 winter months [95]. Children who took vitamin D3 were 42% less likely to develop influenza A than those who took a placebo. Another trial, in contrast, found that 50 mcg (2,000 IU)/day vitamin D3 for 12 weeks during the winter failed to reduce the incidence of upper respiratory tract infections or the duration or severity of symptoms when compared with placebo in 162 adults age 18 to 80 years [96]. In this trial, both groups had adequate mean 25(OH)D levels for bone and overall health at baseline. Weekly supplementation with 350 mcg (14,000 IU) vitamin D3 for 3 years also failed to reduce the risk of tuberculosis or acute respiratory infection in comparison with placebo in 8,851 children age 6 to 13 in Mongolia, almost all of whom had serum 25(OH)D levels below 20 ng/mL at baseline [97].

Results have been mixed from systematic reviews and meta-analyses that have examined the effects of vitamin D supplementation on the risk of pneumonia and other respiratory tract infections. Results were negative in a 2016 Cochrane Review that evaluated the use of vitamin D supplementation for preventing infections, including pneumonia, in children younger than 5 years [98]. The review included two trials that examined pneumonia incidence in a total of 3,134 participants; one trial was placebo controlled, and the other had a control group that received no treatment. Vitamin D3 (10 mcg [402 IU]/day for 12 months or 2,500 mcg [100,000 IU] every 3 months for 18 months) did not reduce the risk of pneumonia.

A 2017 systematic review and meta-analysis of vitamin D supplementation to prevent acute respiratory tract infections (mostly upper respiratory tract infections) had mixed findings. This analysis included 25 clinical trials and a total of 10,933 participants from newborns to adults age 95 years [99]. Study durations ranged from 7 weeks to 1.5 years, and vitamin D supplementation schedules varied widely (e.g., one 2,500 mcg bolus, 25 mcg daily, or 500 mcg weekly). Vitamin D supplementation resulted in a 12% lower risk of acute respiratory tract infections than placebo. However, vitamin D supplementation was beneficial only in participants who took supplements daily or weekly, not in those who took one or more bolus doses. In addition, protective effects were stronger in those with baseline 25(OH)D levels less than 25 nmol/L (10 ng/mL) than in those with higher levels.

A subsequent systematic review and meta-analysis by the same research team that included 46 clinical trials and a total of 75,541 participants age 0 to 95 years found some benefits of vitamin D supplementation [100]. Participants who took vitamin D supplements had an 8% lower risk of developing one or more acute respiratory infections. Similarly, another 2021 systematic review and meta-analysis of 20 clinical trials in a total of 9,902 adults found that vitamin D supplements reduced the risk of acute respiratory infections by 3% and shortened the duration of symptoms by 6% [67].

Other systematic reviews and meta-analyses have also found that vitamin D supplementation helps reduce the risk of respiratory tract infections and influenza in children and adults [101-103] and that vitamin D deficiency is associated with an increased risk of community-acquired pneumonia in children and adults [104]. In addition, serum 25(OH)D concentrations are inversely associated with risk and severity of acute respiratory tract infections [105]. In contrast, a meta-analysis of 30 clinical trials in a total of 30,263 participants age 3 to 81 years found that vitamin D supplementation did not reduce the risk of respiratory tract infections [106]. Mixed findings were reported in a meta-analysis of six trials in a total of 6,843 children and seven trials in a total of 3,994 adults [54]. It found that 25 to 100 mcg (1,000 to 4,000 IU)/day vitamin D supplementation reduced the risk of respiratory tract infections by 11% in adults, but 25 to 50 mcg (1,000 to 2,000 IU)/day did not affect risk in children.

Vitamin D supplementation did not reduce the risk of respiratory tract infections in adolescents and adults in two clinical trials whose results were published in 2022 [107,108]. In one of these trials, 34,601 men and women age 18 to 75 years in Norway who were not taking daily vitamin D supplements took 5 mL cod liver oil containing 10 mcg (400 IU) vitamin D3 or placebo for up to 6 months during the winter [107]. The cod liver oil did not reduce the incidence of acute respiratory infections. The other trial involved 6,200 participants age 16 years or older in the United Kingdom who were not taking vitamin D supplements [108]. Half of the participants were offered a vitamin D blood test. Those whose 25(OH)D level was less than 75 nmol/L (30ng/mL) received a 6-month supply of a lower dose (20 mcg [800 IU]/day) or a higher dose (80 mcg [3,200 IU]/day) of vitamin D3. The other participants were not offered vitamin D tests or supplementation, and the study did not use a placebo. Neither lower nor higher doses of vitamin D3 reduced the risk of acute respiratory tract infections.

Researchers have also examined whether vitamin D supplementation helps treat respiratory tract infections, but results suggest that it has limited, if any, benefits. A 2022 meta-analysis included 18 clinical trials in a total of 3,648 participants with mean ages between 12 months and 62 years [109]. It assessed whether one-time, daily, or occasional vitamin D doses ranging from 15 to 15,000 mcg (600 IU to 600,000 IU), depending on dosing schedule, for up to 8 months helped treat respiratory infections. Treatment outcomes differed among trials but included sputum conversion (for pulmonary tuberculosis), survival rate, and no need for ICU admission. Vitamin D supplementation had some small beneficial effects on treatment outcomes, but when the authors analyzed only the 12 high-quality trials, the differences between groups in the trials were no longer statistically significant.
HIV infection

People with HIV may be more likely to have vitamin D deficiency because many medications that treat HIV/AIDS increase vitamin D catabolism [110,111]. Inflammation and comorbidities from HIV infection may also contribute to low vitamin D levels [112]. Low vitamin D levels could partly explain why people with HIV appear to have a higher risk of major bone fractures [113]. Many, but not all studies, also show associations between vitamin D deficiency and decreased CD4+ T-cell counts [111].

Vitamin D deficiency might also increase HIV infection severity [114]. Observational studies show associations between low vitamin D status and increased risk of pulmonary tuberculosis and mortality in people with HIV [115]. In addition, low levels of vitamin D in pregnant women with HIV are associated with poor fetal and infant growth [116].

Results from clinical trials, however, have not shown that vitamin D supplementation improves outcomes in people with HIV [115,116]. In one clinical trial in Tanzania, 4,000 men and women (mean age about 39 years) with HIV who had serum 25(OH)D levels lower than 30 ng/mL at ART initiation took 1,250 mcg (50,000 IU) vitamin D3 weekly for 4 weeks, followed by daily doses of 50 mcg (2,000 IU) for 11 additional months or placebo [115]. Vitamin D3 supplementation did not affect rates of mortality or pulmonary tuberculosis. Moreover, vitamin D3 supplementation did not affect secondary outcomes, including risk of HIV progression, viral suppression, comorbidities (nausea, vomiting, cough, fever, or diarrhea), changes in body weight, or depression [112].

Another clinical trial in Tanzania examined the effects of vitamin D3 supplementation during pregnancy and lactation in 2,300 women with HIV [116]. Participants took 75 mcg (3,000 IU)/day vitamin D3 or placebo from the second trimester of pregnancy (12–27 weeks) until 1 year after delivery. Vitamin D3 supplementation did not affect the risk of maternal HIV progression or death. The results also showed no difference in the risk of small-for-gestational-age birth or of infant stunting at 1 year.
Safety

Daily intakes of up to 25–100 mcg (1,000 IU–4,000 IU) vitamin D, depending on age, in foods and dietary supplements are safe for infants and children, and up to 100 mcg (4,000 IU) is safe for adults, including women who are pregnant or lactating [78]. These ULs, however, do not apply to people taking vitamin D under the care of a physician.

Higher intakes (usually from supplements) can lead to nausea, vomiting, muscle weakness, confusion, pain, loss of appetite, dehydration, excessive urination and thirst, and kidney stones. In extreme cases, vitamin D toxicity causes renal failure, calcification of soft tissues throughout the body (including in coronary vessels and heart valves), cardiac arrhythmias, and even death [117-119].

Several types of medications might interact with vitamin D. For example, orlistat, statins, and steroids can reduce vitamin D levels [120,121]. In addition, taking vitamin D supplements with thiazide diuretics might lead to hypercalcemia [120].

More information on vitamin D is available in the ODS health professional fact sheet on vitamin D.

For information on vitamin D and COVID-19, please see the ODS health professional fact sheet, Dietary Supplements in the Time of COVID-19.
Vitamin E

Vitamin E, also called alpha-tocopherol, is an essential nutrient that is present in several foods, including nuts, seeds, vegetable oils, and green leafy vegetables. The RDA for vitamin E is 4 to 15 mg for infants and children, depending on age, and 15 to 19 mg for adults, including women who are pregnant or lactating [56].

Vitamin E is an antioxidant that plays an important role in immune function by helping maintain cell membrane integrity and epithelial barriers and by enhancing antibody production, lymphocyte proliferation, and natural killer cell activity [4,5,15,17,25,58,79,122]. Vitamin E also limits inflammation by inhibiting the production of proinflammatory cytokines [123].

Human and animal studies suggest that vitamin E deficiency impairs humoral and cell-mediated immunity, is associated with reduced natural killer cell activity, and increases susceptibility to infections [5,15-18,122]. High-dose vitamin E supplements (60 to 800 mg/day) for 1 to 8 months might enhance lymphocyte proliferation, interleukin-2 production, and natural killer cell activity and could increase antibody titers after hepatitis B and tetanus vaccines in adults age 60 or older [124-126].

Frank vitamin E deficiency is rare, except in people with intestinal malabsorption disorders [56,79]. Research on the ability of vitamin E to improve immune function tends to use supplemental vitamin E rather than simply ensuring that study participants achieve adequate vitamin E status because it is thought that higher doses may be needed to achieve beneficial effects [122].
Efficacy
Pneumonia and other respiratory tract infections

Because of vitamin E’s effects on immune function, researchers have examined whether vitamin E supplementation can reduce the risk or severity of respiratory tract infections. However, study findings have been mixed. Some researchers suggest that differences among study findings may reflect differences in participants’ vitamin E status at baseline and differences in supplementation doses used in these studies [127].

A prospective cohort study in 717 men and women age 65 years or older in Canada who were hospitalized with pneumonia found that those who took vitamin E supplements (doses not specified) were 63% less likely to be rehospitalized within 90 days than those who did not [128]. However, vitamin E supplementation did not affect the risk of death from pneumonia within 30 days of the initial hospitalization.

A few clinical trials that have examined the effects of vitamin E supplementation on respiratory tract infections in infants and young children or in older adults suggest that vitamin E offers limited benefits and might even increase symptom severity. A clinical trial in a low-income urban area in India examined the effects of 200 mg alpha-tocopherol and 100 mg ascorbic acid twice daily or placebo for 5 days in 174 infants and young children age 2 to 35 months who were hospitalized with severe acute lower respiratory tract infections and receiving standard care [129]. Supplementation did not affect the time required to recover from illness.

Another clinical trial in which 652 healthy men and women age 60 years or older took one of four different treatments daily for about 15 months identified no benefits and, in fact, found potential risks of vitamin E supplementation to prevent respiratory tract infections. The treatments were 200 mg vitamin E (as alpha-tocopheryl acetate), a multivitamin/mineral supplement (containing 10 mg vitamin E), a multivitamin/mineral and vitamin E, or placebo [130]. All but one of the participants had adequate vitamin E concentrations at the start of the study. The vitamin E supplements did not affect the incidence of acute respiratory tract infections throughout the trial. Moreover, participants who took the vitamin E supplement had longer durations of illness, more severe symptoms (including fever and activity restrictions), and greater numbers of symptoms than those who did not take vitamin E.

Results were also negative in a similar trial in 617 adults age 65 or older living in nursing homes to determine whether daily supplementation with 200 IU vitamin E (91 mg, as dl-alpha-tocopherol) for 1 year reduced the risk of upper or lower respiratory tract infections [131]. Vitamin E supplementation did not affect the incidence of upper or lower respiratory tract infections or the total durations of the infections.

Results were mixed in the Alpha-Tocopherol, Beta-Carotene Cancer Prevention study in 29,133 male smokers age 50–69 years who took 50 mg/day vitamin E (in the form of dl-alpha-tocopheryl acetate) with or without beta-carotene or placebo [132]. Vitamin E supplementation for a median of 6.1 years did not affect the risk of hospital-treated pneumonia. In contrast, a secondary analysis of data from this trial found that vitamin E supplementation reduced the risk of pneumonia by 69% among the 2,216 participants who started smoking at the age of 21 years or older, smoked 5–19 cigarettes per day, and exercised recreationally [133]. Among the 5,253 participants who smoked more than 19 cigarettes per day or did not exercise, however, vitamin E supplementation did not affect the risk of pneumonia.
Safety

All intake levels of vitamin E found naturally in foods are considered safe. Up to 200 mg to 800 mg/day supplemental vitamin E is safe for children, depending on age, and up to 1,000 mg/day is safe for adults, including women who are pregnant or lactating [56]. These ULs, however, do not apply to people taking vitamin E under the care of a physician. Higher vitamin E intakes can increase the risk of bleeding because of the vitamin’s anticoagulant effect and can cause hemorrhagic stroke.

Vitamin E supplementation might interact with certain medications, including anticoagulant and antiplatelet medications. It might also reduce the effectiveness of radiation therapy and chemotherapy by protecting tumor cells from the action of these agents [76,134,135].

More information on vitamin E is available in the ODS health professional fact sheet on vitamin E.

For information on vitamin E and COVID-19, please see the ODS health professional fact sheet, Dietary Supplements in the Time of COVID-19.
Minerals
Selenium

Selenium is an essential mineral contained in many foods, including Brazil nuts, seafood, meat, poultry, eggs, and dairy products as well as bread, cereals, and other grain products. The RDA for selenium is 15 to 70 mcg for infants and children, depending on age, and 55 to 70 mcg for adults, including women who are pregnant or lactating [56].

Human and animal studies suggest that selenium helps support both the innate and adaptive immune systems through its role in T-cell maturation and function and in natural killer cell activity [2,25,58,136-139]. It may also reduce the risk of infections [2,15,25,58,137-141]. As a component of enzymes that have antioxidant activities, selenium might help reduce the systemic inflammatory response that can lead to ARDS and organ failure [27,58,140,141].

Low selenium status in humans has been associated with lower natural killer cell activity, increased risk of some bacterial infections, and increased virulence of certain viruses, including hepatitis B and C [2,5,10,15,27,137,142,143]. However, evidence is conflicting whether selenium supplementation enhances immunity against pathogens in humans [136]. Some research suggests that 100 to 300 mcg/day supplemental selenium improves immune function and that doses of 50 or 100 mcg/day enhance the immune response to poliovirus vaccine in adults with low selenium status [15]. However, a systematic review and meta-analysis of nine clinical trials in a total of 370 healthy men and women age 18 years or older found that 13 to 400 mcg/day supplemental selenium for 8 to 48 weeks did not affect immunoglobulin or white blood cell concentrations; the only beneficial effect was increased natural killer cell activity [136]. Studies have also examined whether intravenous selenium (which is classified as a drug in the United States) benefits adults with sepsis; those who are critically ill and requiring mechanical ventilation; adults who are undergoing elective major surgery; or those who are critically ill from burns, head injury, brain hemorrhage, or stroke [141,144,145]. The results of these studies provide no clear evidence of benefit.

Selenium status varies by geographic region because of differences in the amounts of selenium in soil and in local foods consumed [56,146]. Selenium deficiency is very rare in the United States and Canada, but low selenium status is common in some areas of the world, such as parts of Europe and China [139,147].
Efficacy
HIV infection

In children and adults with HIV, selenium deficiency is associated with a higher risk of morbidity and mortality [142]. However, studies that examined whether micronutrient supplementation, including selenium, affects risk of HIV transmission or disease outcomes in children and adults have had mixed results. An observational study in Thailand did not identify associations between selenium status in children with HIV and treatment outcomes [148]. This study included 141 boys and girls with HIV (median age 7.3 years), 97 of whom started ART over a period of 48 weeks. Baseline selenium levels (all of which were adequate) showed no associations with ART treatment outcomes.

Clinical trials have found limited beneficial effects of selenium supplementation on immune function in people with HIV. A clinical trial in Rwanda examined the effects of selenium supplementation on CD4+ T-cell counts in 300 men and women 21 years of age or older with HIV. Participants had CD4+ T-cell counts between 400 and 650 cells/mcL, so they were not yet eligible for ART [149]. They took 200 mcg/day selenium or placebo for 24 months. During the trial, average CD4+ T-cell counts declined in both the treatment and placebo groups, but the rate of depletion was 43.8% lower in those who took selenium. However, selenium supplementation had no effect on the composite endpoint of a CD4+ count of less than 350 cells/mcL or initiation of ART.

Selenium supplementation provided no benefits in another trial that randomized 146 men and women with HIV (mean age 38.6 years) in Iran who were receiving ART to take 50 mg/day zinc, 200 mcg/day selenium, or placebo for 6 months. The investigators then followed participants for another 3 months but found that selenium supplementation did not raise CD4+ T-cell counts [150].

Two Cochrane Reviews also concluded that selenium supplements offer little, if any, benefit for people with HIV. The first review examined whether micronutrient supplementation reduces the burden of HIV infection in children, and it included three clinical trials that administered 30 or 60 mcg/day selenium as part of a multiple-micronutrient formulation in children with HIV who were living in South Africa or Uganda [45]. The authors found that evidence was insufficient to determine whether supplementation with selenium alone is beneficial. Similarly, the authors of a second Cochrane Review that included four clinical trials in a total of 1,187 adults with HIV concluded that 200 mcg/day selenium for 9 to 24 months may have little to no effect on CD4+ T-cell count and viral load and that evidence is insufficient to determine whether selenium supplementation affects the risk of hospital admission [46].

Researchers have also examined whether blood selenium levels or selenium supplementation affect pregnancy outcomes in women with HIV. Findings from these studies suggest that low blood selenium levels are associated with a higher risk of preterm delivery and that selenium supplementation might reduce the risk of preterm delivery but has mixed effects on other outcomes. For example, a cross-sectional study in Nigeria of 113 pregnant adolescents and women age 15–49 years with HIV found that those with a selenium deficiency (defined as blood selenium less than 0.89 mcmol/L) at 14–26 weeks of gestation were almost eight times as likely to have a preterm delivery as those with normal selenium levels [151]. Individuals with a low CD4+ T-cell count also had an eightfold higher risk of preterm delivery. In a clinical trial in Nigeria, researchers examined whether selenium supplementation affects pregnancy outcomes and disease progression in 90 pregnant women (mean age 29.7 years) with HIV at 14 to 27 weeks of gestation [152]. In this trial, participants took 200 mcg/day selenium or placebo between enrollment and delivery. Those who took selenium had a 68% lower risk of preterm delivery than those who took placebo, but the risk of low birthweight did not differ between the two groups. In addition, selenium supplementation did not affect the levels of HIV infection markers (CD4+ T-cell counts and viral load).
Safety

Up to 45 to 400 mcg/day selenium from foods and dietary supplements is safe for infants and children, depending on age, and up to 400 mcg/day is safe for adults, including women who are pregnant or lactating [56]. These ULs, however, do not apply to people taking selenium under the care of a physician.

Higher intakes of selenium can cause a garlic odor in the breath and a metallic taste in the mouth as well as hair and nail loss or brittleness [56]. Other signs and symptoms of excess selenium intakes include nausea, diarrhea, skin rashes, mottled teeth, fatigue, irritability, and nervous system abnormalities.

Cisplatin, a chemotherapy agent used to treat ovarian, bladder, lung, and other cancers, can reduce selenium levels in hair, plasma, and serum [153,154]. The evidence from studies examining whether selenium supplementation helps reduce the side effects of cisplatin and other chemotherapy agents is uncertain [154,155].

More information on selenium is available in the ODS health professional fact sheet on selenium.

For information on selenium and COVID-19, please see the ODS health professional fact sheet, Dietary Supplements in the Time of COVID-19.
Zinc

Zinc is an essential nutrient contained in a wide variety of foods, including oysters, crab, lobster, beef, pork, poultry, beans, nuts, whole grains, and dairy products. The RDA for zinc is 2–13 mg for infants and children, depending on age, and 8–12 mg for adults, including women who are pregnant or lactating [29].

Zinc is involved in numerous aspects of cellular metabolism. It is necessary for the catalytic activity of approximately 100 enzymes and it plays a role in many body processes, including both the innate and adaptive immune systems [2,5,29,58,156-159]. Zinc also has antiviral and anti-inflammatory properties, and it helps maintain the integrity of tissue barriers, such as the respiratory epithelia [5,58,83,159-161].

Zinc deficiency adversely affects immune function by impairing the formation, activation, and maturation of lymphocytes. In addition, zinc deficiency decreases ratios of helper to suppressor T cells, production of interleukin-2, and activity of natural killer cells and cytotoxic T cells [2,4,5,27,156,158,162]. Furthermore, zinc deficiency is associated with elevated levels of proinflammatory mediators [160]. These effects on immune response probably increase susceptibility to infections [163] and inflammatory diseases, especially those affecting the lungs [160].

Studies have found associations between low zinc status and higher risk of viral infections [79], and people with zinc deficiency have a higher risk of diarrhea and respiratory diseases [2]. Poor zinc status is also common among people with HIV or hepatitis C and is a risk factor for pneumonia in older adults [27,58,161,164,165]. Some research suggests that zinc supplementation increases the number of T cells in the blood of older adults living in nursing homes [166].

Although zinc deficiency is not common in the United States, 15% of the U.S. population might obtain marginal amounts of zinc [167]. Older adults are among the groups most likely to have low intakes.
Efficacy
Common cold

Researchers have hypothesized that zinc could reduce the severity and duration of cold symptoms by directly inhibiting rhinovirus binding and replication in the nasal mucosa and suppressing inflammation [168,169]. In studies of the effects of zinc supplements on the common cold, zinc is usually administered in a lozenge or syrup that temporarily sticks to the mouth and throat, placing the zinc in contact with the rhinovirus in those areas.

The results from clinical trials that have examined the effects of supplemental zinc on the common cold have been inconsistent. Overall, however, supplemental zinc in lozenge or syrup form appears to reduce the duration, but not the severity, of signs and symptoms of the common cold when taken shortly after a person develops a cold [170-173].

In one clinical trial that found beneficial effects of zinc on the common cold, 50 adults took a zinc acetate lozenge (13.3 mg zinc) or placebo every 2–3 wakeful hours within 24 hours of developing the common cold for as long as they had cold symptoms. In comparison with placebo, the zinc lozenges reduced the duration of colds by 3 days and the severity of cold symptoms (cough, nasal discharge, and muscle aches) [174].

Results were more mixed in another clinical trial in which 273 adults with experimentally induced colds took lozenges containing zinc gluconate (13.3 mg zinc) or zinc acetate (5.0 mg or 11.5 mg zinc) every 2 to 3 hours while awake, for a total of 6 lozenges per day, or placebo, for up to 14 days [175]. Illnesses lasted 1 day less with the zinc gluconate lozenges than with the placebo, but the lozenges had no effect on symptom severity. Furthermore, the 5.0 and 11.5 mg zinc acetate lozenges had no effect on cold duration or severity. In a second trial described in the same report, neither zinc gluconate nor zinc acetate lozenges affected the duration or severity of cold symptoms in comparison with placebo in 281 adults with colds [175].

A 2021 systematic review and meta-analysis found that zinc appears to reduce the duration of the common cold but has mixed effects on the severity of signs and symptoms [170]. It included 28 clinical trials (including the three described above) with a total of 5,446 participants (mostly adults younger than 65 years) who had a community-acquired viral respiratory tract infection or were inoculated with a rhinovirus. Most trials provided zinc in the form of zinc acetate or gluconate lozenges with total daily zinc doses of 45 to 300 mg for up to 2 weeks, but some trials used nasal sprays or gels. In participants who used products containing zinc, symptoms resolved an average of 2 days earlier than in those who took a placebo. Zinc also reduced the severity of symptoms on the third day of illness. However, average daily symptom severity did not differ between those who were and were not treated with zinc supplements. In addition, zinc did not affect the risk of developing a cold after rhinovirus inoculation.

Other recent systematic reviews and meta-analyses have also found that zinc shortens the duration of the signs and symptoms of colds but does not reduce the risk of colds [54,67,176]. The author of an earlier systematic review concluded that use of zinc lozenges at doses of over 75 mg/day reduced the duration of the common cold, whereas lower doses did not [172].
Pneumonia in children

In low-income countries, pneumonia is responsible for 15% of all deaths in children younger than 5 years and for 19% of all childhood deaths [177]. Poor zinc status is associated with greater susceptibility to pneumonia, more severe disease, and higher mortality risk in children [178-182].

Several clinical trials have examined the effects of zinc supplementation on the incidence of pneumonia and as an adjunctive treatment for pneumonia. A 2016 Cochrane Review of six trials in low-income countries found that supplementation with 10 to 20 mg/day zinc for up to 20 months in a total of 5,193 children age 2 to 59 months resulted in lower incidence and prevalence of pneumonia than placebo [177].

However, most research suggests that the adjunctive use of zinc supplements to treat pneumonia in children does not affect mortality or time to recovery. A 2020 systematic review and meta-analysis included 11 clinical trials in children age 2 to 60 months with mostly severe pneumonia in low- and middle-income countries [183]. Mortality rates from pneumonia and time to recovery from severe pneumonia did not differ between children treated with 10 to 20 mg/day supplemental zinc and those treated with placebo for 7–14 days or until discharge. Another meta-analysis of six placebo-controlled trials that included 2,216 children age 2 to 60 months found that zinc supplementation reduced mortality rates from severe pneumonia but not rates of treatment failure or changes in antibiotic therapy [184].
Diarrhea and gastroenteritis in children

Diarrhea is associated with high mortality rates among children in low-income countries, where it causes about 500,000 deaths annually [157,185]. Zinc supplementation may benefit children with acute diarrhea, especially in low-income countries, where zinc deficiency is common. Scientists believe that zinc’s beneficial effects stem from its role in supporting adaptive immunity and maintaining the mucosal integrity of the gastrointestinal system [157].

Clinical trials show that zinc supplementation helps shorten the duration of diarrhea in children in low-income countries. A 2016 Cochrane Review included 33 trials that compared the effects of zinc supplementation with those of placebo in 10,841 children age 1 month to 5 years who had acute or persistent diarrhea [186]. Most studies were conducted in Asian countries that had high rates of zinc deficiency. Zinc was administered in the form of zinc acetate, zinc gluconate, or zinc sulphate. The most common dose was 20 mg/day zinc, and about half the studies administered zinc for 2 weeks. The authors concluded, based on evidence of low to moderate certainty, that zinc supplementation shortens the duration of diarrhea by about half a day in children older than 6 months and reduces the likelihood that diarrhea will persist for at least 7 days by 27%. In addition, evidence that the authors deemed to have high certainty showed that zinc supplementation reduces the duration of diarrhea in children with signs of malnutrition by about a day. In children younger than 6 months, however, zinc supplementation did not affect mean duration of diarrhea or persistence of diarrhea for 7 days.

A 2018 systematic review and meta-analysis had similar findings. It examined the use of zinc alone or in combination with other treatments for acute diarrhea and gastroenteritis in 174 studies in 32,430 children, mostly from low- and middle-income countries [187]. Analyses showed that zinc alone or in combination reduced the duration of diarrhea by about ¾ to 1½ days. The authors concluded that zinc was one of the most effective interventions of those examined, especially when it was combined with Saccharomyces boulardii (a probiotic) or smectite (a natural clay that contains minerals), for reducing the duration of acute diarrhea and gastroenteritis in children.

The WHO and UNICEF recommend supplementation with 20 mg zinc per day, or 10 mg for infants younger than 6 months, for 10 to 14 days to treat acute childhood diarrhea [185]. However, most trials of zinc supplementation for diarrhea have been conducted in low-income countries [157]. In well-nourished children, zinc supplements might have only a marginal effect on diarrhea duration.
HIV infection

HIV infection reduces the absorption and metabolism of zinc from foods [188]. In addition, people with HIV often have diarrhea, which can result in excessive losses of zinc. For these reasons, people with HIV often have low plasma or serum zinc levels.

Several clinical trials have found some beneficial effects of zinc supplementation to manage the morbidity and mortality associated with HIV infection. In one trial, for example, 231 adults in the United States who had HIV infection and plasma zinc levels lower than 75 mcg/dL took supplemental zinc (12 mg/day for women or 15 mg/day for men) or placebo for 18 months [189]. The supplements reduced rates of immunological failure events (CD4+ T-cell counts less than 200 cells/mL) by 76% and rates of diarrhea by 60% but had no effect on mortality. Another trial in Iran randomized 146 adults with HIV to 50 mg/day zinc, 200 mcg/day selenium, or placebo for 6 months and then followed participants for another 3 months [150]. In this trial, the zinc supplements decreased rates of opportunistic infections but did not increase CD4+ T-cell counts.

However, findings were less positive in two Cochrane Reviews and another trial (not included in either Cochrane Review) that assessed the potential benefits of supplementation with micronutrients, including zinc, or placebo in various populations with HIV. The first Cochrane Review, which focused on micronutrient supplementation for children with HIV, included two trials that administered 10 mg/day zinc with or without vitamin A for up to 15 months in a total of 128 children with HIV in South Africa [45]. One of these trials, which examined the risk of diarrhea or respiratory diseases, found that the combination of zinc and vitamin A supplementation did not benefit the children compared with vitamin A alone (the trial had no placebo group), whereas the other trial found that the risk of watery diarrhea was 49% lower with zinc supplements than with placebo. However, zinc supplementation did not affect viral load or mortality rates in this second trial. The second Cochrane Review evaluated micronutrient supplements for adults with HIV and included six clinical trials of zinc supplements (12–50 mg/day for 14 days to 18 months or 1 weekly 90 mg dose for 6 months) in a total of 826 participants [46]. The authors concluded that although zinc supplements might improve zinc status, the supplements appeared to have little if any effect on CD4+ T-cell counts or viral load and inconclusive effects on mortality and diarrhea frequency.

In a placebo-controlled trial in 400 pregnant women with HIV in Tanzania, 25 mg/day zinc from 12 to 27 weeks gestation until 6 weeks after delivery had no effect on birth weight, duration of gestation, or rates of fetal mortality or early mother-to-child transmission of HIV [190,191]. In addition, zinc supplementation did not affect maternal viral load or CD4+, CD8+ or CD3+ T-cell counts. However, the supplements blunted the rise in hemoglobin concentrations between baseline and 6 weeks after delivery.
Safety

Intakes up to 4–34 mg/day zinc in foods and dietary supplements are safe for infants and children, depending on age, and up to 40 mg/day is safe for adults, including women who are pregnant or lactating [29]. These ULs, however, do not apply to people taking zinc under the care of a physician.

Higher intakes can cause nausea, vomiting, loss of appetite, abdominal cramps, diarrhea, headaches, and a metallic taste in the mouth [29,32]. Chronic consumption of 150–450 mg/day zinc can cause low copper status, reduced immune function, and lower levels of high-density lipoproteins [192]. In clinical trials in children, zinc supplementation to treat diarrhea increased the risk of vomiting more than placebo [186,187].

Zinc supplements might interact with several types of medications. For example, zinc can reduce the absorption of some types of antibiotics and penicillamine, a drug used to treat rheumatoid arthritis [193,194]. Other medications, such as thiazide diuretics and certain antibiotics, can reduce zinc absorption [195,196].

More information on zinc is available in the ODS health professional fact sheet on zinc.

For information on zinc and COVID-19, please see the ODS health professional fact sheet, Dietary Supplements in the Time of COVID-19.
Botanicals
Andrographis

Andrographis paniculata, also known as Chuān Xīn Lián, is an herb that is native to subtropical and Southeast Asia [197]. Its leaves and other aerial (above-ground) parts are used in traditional Ayurvedic, Chinese, and Thai medicine for relieving symptoms of the common cold, influenza, and other respiratory tract infections [198-201]. The active constituents of andrographis are believed to be andrographolide and related compounds, which are diterpene lactones that might have antiviral, anti-inflammatory, and immune-stimulating effects [197,199,201-206].
Efficacy
Common cold, influenza, and other respiratory tract infections

Results from several clinical trials suggest that andrographis might reduce the duration of upper respiratory tract infections and the severity of symptoms. One of these trials used a common andrographis preparation called Kan Jang. The trial included 50 men and women age 18 to 50 years with the common cold who took four tablets of Kan Jang (each containing 85 mg of an andrographis extract) three times daily for 5 days (1,020 mg total daily dose) or placebo within 3 days of developing cold symptoms [207]. Participants who took Kan Jang experienced milder symptoms, recovered sooner, and took fewer days of sick leave than those who took placebo. In another clinical trial, 223 men and women age 18 to 60 years with upper respiratory tract infections took either KalmCold containing 100 mg of an andrographis extract twice daily or placebo for 5 days [208]. The results showed no differences in symptom severity during days 1 to 3 of treatment. However, between days 3 and 5, participants who took KalmCold experienced milder symptoms—including cough, nasal discharge, headache, fever, and sore throat (but not earache)—than those who took placebo.

Two systematic reviews and meta-analyses of clinical trials found that andrographis preparations had beneficial effects on symptoms and duration of the common cold. The more recent of these analyses, published in 2017, included 33 clinical trials (including the two described above) that evaluated the effects of andrographis alone or in combination with other herbs on symptoms of acute upper and lower respiratory tract infections in a total of 7,175 participants [199]. Treatment protocols varied widely, but typical daily doses ranged from 200 to 1,200 mg andrographis extract for 3 to 7 days; studies compared andrographis with placebo, usual care, or other herbal interventions. The analyses showed that andrographis significantly reduced the severity of cough, sore throat, and overall symptoms. However, the authors noted that the findings should be interpreted with caution because the studies were heterogenous and many were of poor quality.

Similar findings were reported from a 2015 systematic review and meta-analysis [209]. It included six clinical trials (including the two described above) that administered Kan Jang or KalmCold (31.5 to 200 mg/day andrographis extract) for 3 to 10 days to treat cough symptoms resulting from the common cold or other upper respiratory tract infections in a total of 807 participants. All studies in this analysis compared andrographis with placebo, not usual care or other herbal interventions as in the 2017 meta-analysis described above. Andrographis reduced the frequency and severity of cough to a greater extent than placebo. Three earlier systematic reviews also showed that andrographis appears to alleviate symptoms of upper respiratory tract infections [200,201,210].

Although these findings suggest that andrographis might be useful to manage the symptoms and reduce the duration of upper respiratory tract infections, the evidence has several weaknesses. For example, the studies used different andrographis formulations, and many of the clinical trials were conducted by investigators affiliated with the manufacturer of Kan Jang or KalmCold [200,201].
Safety

The safety of andrographis has not been well studied, but no safety concerns have been reported when typical doses of the herb (340 to 1,200 mg/day) were used for several days or weeks [200,201,211]. Clinical trials have found minor adverse effects, including nausea, vomiting, vertigo, skin rashes, diarrhea, and fatigue [199,201,209]. Allergic reactions might also occur [201,206]. Findings from some animal studies suggest that andrographis might adversely affect fertility, so experts recommend against its use by men and women during the preconception period and by women who are pregnant [198,200,201].

According to animal and laboratory studies, andrographis might decrease blood pressure and inhibit platelet aggregation, so it could interact with antihypertensive and anticoagulant medications by enhancing their effects [211-213]. Because of its potential immune-stimulating effects, andrographis might also reduce the effectiveness of immunosuppressants [202,211].

For information on andrographis and COVID-19, please see the ODS health professional fact sheet, Dietary Supplements in the Time of COVID-19.
Echinacea

Echinacea, commonly known as purple coneflower, is an herb that grows in North America and Europe [214]. Although the genus Echinacea has many species, extracts of E. purpurea, E. angustifolia, and E. pallida are the most frequently used in dietary supplements. The echinacea supplements on the market in the United States often contain extracts from multiple species and plant parts [215].

Echinacea contains volatile terpenes, polysaccharides, polyacetylenes, alkamides, phenolic compounds, caffeic acid esters, and glycoproteins [214-216]. However, echinacea’s purported active constituents are not well defined [216], and the chemical composition of various echinacea species differs [215].

Echinacea might have antibacterial activities, stimulate monocytes and natural killer cells, and inhibit virus binding to host cells [3,214]. It might also reduce inflammation by inhibiting inflammatory cytokines [3]. Most studies of echinacea have assessed whether it helps prevent and treat the common cold and other upper respiratory illnesses, but it has also been used in traditional medicine to promote wound healing [214,216].
Efficacy
Common cold, influenza, and other respiratory tract infections

Results from clinical trials examining the effects of echinacea for the common cold have been mixed. Overall, studies suggest echinacea might slightly reduce the risk of developing a cold but does not shorten the duration or severity of illness. For example, one clinical trial examined the effects of echinacea on the risk of the common cold in 755 men and women (mean age 23 years) [217]. Participants were healthy at the start of the 4-month study and took 2,400 mg/day of an E. purpurea extract (Echinaforce) or placebo; if participants came down with a cold during the study, they increased their dose to 4,000 mg per day. Participants taking echinacea had fewer colds and fewer days with cold symptoms than those taking a placebo. Another clinical trial examined whether echinacea helps treat the common cold in 713 male and female participants age 12 to 80 years who developed cold symptoms within 36 hours before enrollment [218]. Participants took E. purpurea and E. angustifolia extracts four times a day for a combined dose of 10,200 mg during the first 24 hours and then 5,100 mg for 4 days or placebo. Echinacea did not shorten illness duration or severity.

A 2019 systematic review and meta-analysis examined the effects of echinacea (E. purpurea, E angustifolia, E. pallida, or more than one form) to prevent upper respiratory tract infections or reduce the duration of illness [219]. Nine clinical trials (eight in adults and one in children) were included in the prevention meta-analysis portion of this analysis, and seven (all in adults) were included in the duration meta-analysis, including the two trials described above [217,218]. In comparison with placebo, echinacea reduced the risk of developing an upper respiratory infection by 22% but did not affect infection duration. A 2014 Cochrane Review of echinacea use for preventing and treating the common cold had similar results [220]. The review included 24 clinical trials with a total of 4,631 participants. Because of trial heterogeneity, the authors did not pool results for the main analyses, but they concluded that echinacea products might have a weak ability to reduce the risk of colds by about 10% to 20% but do not appear to help treat colds.

Limited research has also examined whether echinacea is beneficial for influenza. One clinical trial found that echinacea had similar effects to oseltamivir (Tamiflu), a medication used to treat influenza. This trial included 473 male and female participants age 12 to 70 who had had influenza symptoms for up to 48 hours [221]. Participants took either E. purpurea extract (25 mL/day Echinaforce Hot Drink for 3 days and then 15 mL/day for 7 days) or oseltamivir for 5 days, followed by 5 days of placebo. The results showed no difference between E. Purpurea and oseltamivir followed by placebo in rapidity of recovery from influenza after 1 day, 5 days, or 10 days of treatment. In addition, participants taking echinacea experienced fewer adverse events, especially nausea and vomiting. Additional research is needed to confirm this finding.
Safety

Echinacea appears to be safe. The most common of echinacea’s few adverse effects are gastrointestinal upset, such as diarrhea, sleeplessness, and skin rashes [32,216,217]. Isolated reports of elevated liver enzymes and liver injury have been associated with its use, but these events could have been caused by a contaminant or the product’s preparation. In rare cases, echinacea can cause allergic reactions [216].

The safety of echinacea during pregnancy is not known, so experts recommend against the use of echinacea supplements by women who are pregnant [222].

Echinacea might interact with several medications. For example, echinacea might increase cytochrome P450 activity, thereby reducing levels of some drugs metabolized by these enzymes [223]. In addition, echinacea might reduce the effectiveness of immunosuppressants due to its potential immunostimulatory activity [224].

For information on echinacea and COVID-19, please see the ODS health professional fact sheet, Dietary Supplements in the Time of COVID-19.
Elderberry (European Elder)

Elder berry (usually written “elderberry”) is the fruit of a small deciduous tree, Sambucus nigra (also known as European elder or black elder), that grows in North America, Europe, and parts of Africa and Asia [225,226]. Elderberry contains many compounds—including anthocyanins, flavonols, and phenolic acids—that might have anti-inflammatory, antiviral, antimicrobial, and immune-stimulating effects [3,226-230]. Studies of the effects of elderberry have primarily used elderberry extracts, not the berries themselves [226].
Efficacy
Common cold, influenza, and other respiratory tract infections

Components of elderberry might help prevent respiratory infections by inhibiting virus binding to host cells and by stimulating the immune system [226]. A few clinical trials have examined the effects of elderberry on the common cold and influenza. The results from these trials have been mixed. However, overall, they suggest that elderberry might help relieve symptoms of respiratory tract infections. One clinical trial examined whether elderberry extract helps prevent and treat the common cold [231]. In this trial, 312 men and women (mean age 50 years) took 600 mg/day elderberry extract or placebo for 10 days before traveling by air. They then took 900 mg/day elderberry extract or placebo during their air travel and for 4 to 5 days after the flight. Elderberry extract did not reduce the number of participants who developed a cold. However, among participants who did develop a cold, elderberry extract reduced cold duration by about 2 days and reduced the severity of symptoms.

A 2019 meta-analysis included four clinical trials (including the trial described above) of the effects of elderberry supplementation on upper respiratory symptoms caused by the common cold or flu in a total of 180 participants age 5 to 59 years [227]. The analysis showed that elderberry supplementation reduced the duration of upper respiratory symptoms, and the effect was stronger for symptoms of influenza than for those caused by the common cold. A 2020 review included the same four trials as well as one that administered an herbal preparation containing both elderberry and Echinacea purpurea [228]. The results showed that elderberry might help relieve symptoms of the common cold and influenza when taken close to the onset of symptoms and for up to 2 weeks.

In contrast, in a 2020 clinical trial, 87 male and female participants age 5 years and older with influenza for less than 48 hours took 15 ml (5,700 mg) elderberry extract (twice daily for ages 5 to 12 years and four times daily for ages 13 and older) or placebo for 5 days [232]. Elderberry had no effect on the duration or severity of illness.

A 2021 systematic review of five clinical trials of elderberry to treat viral respiratory illnesses found beneficial effects on some, but not all, outcomes [233]. The results showed that elderberry supplementation for 2 to 16 days might reduce the severity and duration of the common cold and the duration of flu but does not appear to reduce the risk of the common cold. However, the authors noted that the studies were small, heterogeneous, and of poor quality.
Safety

Elderberry flowers and ripe fruit appear to be safe for consumption. However, the bark, leaves, seeds, and raw or unripe fruit of S. nigra contain a cyanogenic glycoside that is potentially toxic and can cause nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, dehydration due to diuresis, and cyanide poisoning [226,234,235]. The heat from cooking destroys this toxin, so cooked elderberry fruit and properly processed commercial products do not pose this safety concern [3,226,228,234,235]. Elderberry might affect insulin and glucose metabolism, so according to experts, people with diabetes should use it with caution [234]. The safety of elderberry during pregnancy is not known, so experts recommend against the use of elderberry supplements by women who are pregnant [222,226].

Recent analyses suggest that some elderberry supplements are highly diluted or have been adulterated with a cheaper ingredient, such as black rice extract, instead of elderberry [225,236].

Due to its potential immunostimulatory activity, elderberry might reduce the effectiveness of immunosuppressant medications [237].

For information on elderberry and COVID-19, please see the ODS health professional fact sheet, Dietary Supplements in the Time of COVID-19.
Garlic

Garlic (Allium sativum) is a vegetable with a long history of culinary use. Garlic is also available as a dietary supplement in softgel, capsule, tablet, and liquid forms [238].

Researchers have studied garlic mainly to determine whether it lowers blood pressure and cholesterol levels, but it might also have antiviral properties [32,239]. These properties are often attributed to two compounds in garlic—allicin and ajoen [240]. Garlic might also have antimicrobial and antifungal activity [239].

Some dietary supplements contain aged garlic extract, prepared from sliced garlic that is soaked in an aqueous ethanol solution for up to 20 months. The extract is then filtered and concentrated [241,242]. Aged garlic extract contains compounds, such as lectins, fructo-oligosaccharide, and N-alpha-fructosyl arginine, that might affect immune cell function [242]. It also contains S-allyl-L-cysteine and other compounds that might have antioxidant effects and reduce some inflammatory markers [242,243].
Efficacy
Common cold and influenza

Only a few clinical trials have examined whether garlic supplements help prevent or treat the common cold or influenza, and results are inconclusive. One trial included 120 healthy men and women (mean age 26 years) who took 2.56 g/day aged garlic extract or placebo for 90 days during cold and flu season, February through May [244]. After 45 days, the researchers took blood samples from the participants and cultured the natural killer cells and gamma delta T cells. The natural killer cells and gamma delta T cells from participants who took the extract had a higher proliferation rate than those from participants who took placebo. After 90 days, the number of illnesses (colds and influenza) did not differ between groups, nor did the average number of symptoms per illness. However, participants who took aged garlic extract reported a smaller total number of symptoms during the study.

Results were more positive in another trial, in which 146 men and women (mean age 53 years) took one capsule of a garlic supplement (dose not specified) or placebo daily for 12 weeks between November and February [240]. Participants who took garlic had fewer colds (24 among the full study population) during the study than those who took placebo (65 colds). In addition, colds lasted an average of only 1.52 days in the garlic group compared with 5.01 days in the placebo group.
Safety

Garlic is safely consumed worldwide as a culinary ingredient [239], and garlic and its derivatives are generally recognized as safe, according to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) [245]. The adverse effects of garlic dietary supplements are minor and include bad breath, body odor, and skin rash [32,239,240].

Garlic might interact with medications. For example, garlic might have anticoagulant effects, so it might interact with warfarin (Coumadin) and similar medications [239,246,247]. However, the findings from reported case studies on this interaction are inconclusive [239]. Garlic might also reduce blood pressure, so it might interact with antihypertensive medications [248-250].
Ginseng

Ginseng is the common name of several species of the genus Panax, most commonly Panax ginseng (also called Asian ginseng or Korean ginseng) and Panax quinquefolius (American ginseng) [251,252]. Asian ginseng is endemic to China and Korea, whereas American ginseng is endemic to the United States and Canada [251].

Triterpene glycosides, also known as ginsenosides, are some of the main purported active constituents of ginseng [251,253]. Although ginseng contains numerous ginsenosides, research has focused on the Rb1 ginsenoside and compound K, a bioactive substance formed when the intestinal microbiota metabolize ginsenosides [251,253]. Both the product’s preparation method and variations in people’s intestinal microbiota can affect the type and quantity of ginseng’s bioactive compounds in the body [253].

Animal and laboratory studies suggest that ginseng stimulates B-lymphocyte proliferation and increases production of some interleukins and interferon-gamma [251]; these cytokines affect immune activation and modulation [1]. Ginseng might also inhibit virus replication and have anti-inflammatory activity. However, whether ginseng has a clinically meaningful effect on immune function in humans is not clear [251,254].

Another botanical, eleuthero (Eleutherococus senticosus), is sometimes confused with true ginseng. Eleuthero used to be called Siberian ginseng, but it comes from the Eleutherococcus genus of plants, not the Panax genus, and it does not contain ginsenosides [251].
Efficacy
Common cold, influenza, and other respiratory tract infections

Several clinical trials have examined whether ginseng helps prevent upper respiratory tract infections, such as the common cold and influenza. Although the evidence is limited, results from these trials suggest that ginseng might help reduce the risk of developing colds and other respiratory tract infections. However, its effects on symptom severity and duration are unclear.

In one clinical trial, 100 healthy men and women age 30 to 70 years who had not received an influenza vaccine in the previous 6 months took 1 g Panax ginseng extract three times daily or placebo for 12 weeks [255]. Participants taking ginseng were less likely to develop an acute respiratory infection during the study period. However, for study participants who did develop an infection, symptom duration and severity did not differ between groups.

A few clinical trials have examined the effects of CVT-E002 (COLD-fX), a patented ginseng extract that contains 200 mg Panax quinquefolius in each capsule. One of these trials included 323 men and women age 18 to 65 years with a history of at least two colds during the previous year who had not received an influenza vaccine in the past 6 months [256]. Participants took either two capsules per day of Cold-fX (for a daily dose of 400 mg ginseng) or placebo for 4 months starting in November. Participants who took ginseng developed fewer self-reported colds (mean 0.68 colds) during the study period than those who took placebo (mean 0.93 colds). In addition, ginseng reduced the total number of days with cold symptoms from a mean of 16.5 days to 10.8 days and reduced cold symptoms.

A 2020 systematic review and meta-analysis of ginseng to prevent or treat acute upper respiratory tract infections included 10 clinical trials of Panax ginseng or Panax quinquefolius extracts (including those described above) in a total of 2,058 participants [253]. In all but one trial, ginseng was administered daily for 8 to 16 weeks, and the most common doses were 3 g/day Panax ginseng extract or 400 mg/day Panax quinquefolius extract. Ginseng reduced the risk of developing an upper respiratory tract infection by 31% but did not shorten symptom duration. The authors noted that the risk of bias was high to unclear for most trials and that the limitations of the evidence prevented them from drawing conclusions.
Safety

Ginseng appears to be safe. Most of its adverse effects, including headache, sleep difficulty, and gastrointestinal symptoms, are minor [253,254,257]. However, doses of more than 2.5 g/day might cause insomnia, tachyarrhythmias, hypertension, and nervousness [251,253].

A few case reports of vaginal bleeding and mastalgia (breast pain) in the 1970s and 1980s from the use of ginseng preparations raised concerns about the safety of ginseng; as a result, some scientists concluded that ginseng has estrogenic effects [258-261]. However, one of these case reports involved use of Rumanian ginseng [260], and whether this was true ginseng is not clear. In addition, eleuthero was often referred to, incorrectly, as ginseng at that time because it was called Siberian ginseng. So, it is unclear whether these case reports reflected the effects of true ginseng. Nevertheless, some experts caution that ginseng might not be safe for use during pregnancy [253,262,263].

Ginseng might interact with many medications. For example, it might increase the risk of hypoglycemia if taken with antidiabetes medications, increase the risk of adverse effects if taken with stimulants, and reduce the effectiveness of immunosuppressants [263,264].

For information on ginseng and COVID-19, please see the ODS health professional fact sheet, Dietary Supplements in the Time of COVID-19.
Tea and tea catechins

Tea (Camellia sinensis) is a popular beverage around the world that has several purported health benefits. Tea is usually classified into one of three types—green, black, and oolong—according to the way in which the tea leaves are processed [265]. Green tea is made from dried and steamed tea leaves, whereas black and oolong teas are made from fermented tea leaves. Tea extracts are also available as dietary supplements. The purported health effects may vary by the type of tea as well as whether it is consumed as a beverage or dietary supplement.

Tea is one of the richest sources of catechins, which are polyphenolic flavonoids, especially epigallocatechin gallate (EGCG) [266,267]. A typical 250 mL cup of brewed green tea contains 50 to 100 mg of catechins [268], whereas the same amount of brewed black tea contains about 14 to 88 mg of catechins [269]. Amounts vary, however, among tea samples and by brewing time. Studies are evaluating the potential health benefits of EGCG and other catechins, including their ability to modulate the immune system and their anti-inflammatory and antimicrobial properties [265,270]. Laboratory studies suggest that catechins might also have antiviral effects against the influenza A and B viruses [266].
Efficacy
Influenza and other respiratory tract infections

Laboratory research suggests that tea and tea catechins might have antiviral activity. Researchers have therefore examined whether drinking tea or taking supplemental tea catechins affects the risk, duration, and severity of influenza or other respiratory tract infections. However, evidence from clinical trials is limited and mixed.

Studies that found beneficial effects include a clinical trial that examined the effects of catechins and theanine (an amino acid in tea) on the risk of influenza in 197 male and female health care workers age 21 years or older in Japan [271]. Participants took 378 mg/day green tea catechins (including 270 mg EGCG) and 210 mg theanine or placebo for 5 months from November to April. Participants who took green tea catechins and theanine were 75% less likely to acquire clinically defined influenza (defined as the presence of fever and any two of the following symptoms: cough, sore throat, headache, or muscle pain) than those who took placebo. However, for laboratory-confirmed influenza, the incidence of influenza did not differ between groups.

A 2021 systematic review and meta-analysis also showed that tea and tea catechins had some beneficial effects on the risk of influenza and other upper respiratory tract infections, although the evidence had some limitations [272]. The analysis included five prospective cohort studies and clinical trials that administered tea as a dietary supplement or beverage (including the trial described above) in a total of 1,948 participants. In the studies for which catechin doses were available, they ranged from 57 to 378 mg/day for 1 to 5 months. Consuming tea as a beverage or tea catechins as a dietary supplement reduced the risk of an upper respiratory tract infection by 32%, but several of the trials were of poor quality or had a high risk of bias.

Results were also mixed in a 2022 clinical trial examining whether drinking 350 mL of a bottled beverage containing 490 mg of catechins for 12 weeks during the winter affected the duration and severity of upper respiratory tract infections in 109 healthy Japanese men and women (mean age 44.5 years) [273]. Catechins reduced the duration and severity of a runny nose, nasal congestion, and headache but did not affect other symptoms, including sore throat, cough, and fever.
Safety

Drinking moderate amounts of tea is safe. Green tea extract causes mostly mild to moderate adverse effects, including nausea, constipation, abdominal discomfort, and increased blood pressure [274].

However, some green tea extracts might cause liver damage, especially when taken on an empty stomach [275,276]. Intakes of 800 mg EGCG/day or above increase levels of serum transaminases [276]. In addition, at least 50 case reports since 2006 have linked consumption of green tea extracts, primarily ethanolic extracts of green tea, with liver damage [277]. In a 2020 systematic review of the safety of green tea products, the U.S. Pharmacopeia (USP) evaluated 75 case reports of liver damage and animal pharmacological and toxicological information [278]. On the basis of the 35 case reports associated with supplements containing only green tea extract, the USP concluded that the consumption of green tea products definitely caused four cases of liver damage, probably or was highly likely to have caused 25 cases, and possibly caused five cases. The USP notes that problems are more likely when green tea extract is taken on an empty stomach and, therefore, advises taking green tea extracts with food to minimize the risk of liver damage [275,278].

In addition, tea contains caffeine, which can cause sleep disturbances and feelings of nervousness, jitteriness, and shakiness [279]. For healthy adults, the FDA and the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) state that up to 400 mg/day caffeine does not pose safety concerns [279,280], whereas the American Medical Association recommends a limit of 500 mg/day [281].

These levels do not apply to women who are pregnant and may need to limit caffeine consumption further [280]. The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists notes that consuming less than 200 mg/day caffeine during pregnancy does not appear to affect the risk of miscarriage or preterm birth [282]. EFSA also states that up to 200 mg/day does not pose any safety concerns for the fetus [279]. However, some research suggests that even less than 200 mg/day caffeine is associated with decreased fetal growth [283].

Caffeine can be toxic at 15 mg/kg (about 1,000 mg for a 150-lb adult) or more, causing nausea, vomiting, tachycardia, seizures, cerebral edema, and even death [284].

Tea and its constituents might interact with certain medications. For example, green tea extract decreases plasma levels of atorvastatin, a statin medication [285]. In addition, combining caffeine from tea with other stimulants, such as bitter orange and ephedrine, can potentiate the caffeine’s stimulant effects [279].
Other Ingredients
Glutamine

Glutamine is an amino acid that is present in a wide variety of foods that contain protein, including beef, fish, poultry, soy and other beans, eggs, rice, corn and other grains, and milk and other dairy products [286-288]. The body also produces glutamine endogenously.

Typical glutamine intakes in adults are about 5 g/day [289]. The adult human body contains about 70 to 80 g of glutamine, and more than 98% is contained in skeletal muscle cells [286,290].

In normal conditions, the body can synthesize adequate amounts of glutamine to meet metabolic needs, so glutamine is not classified as an essential amino acid [291]. However, under extreme physiological stress, endogenous glutamine synthesis cannot keep up with metabolic need. Therefore, glutamine is classified as conditionally essential [291].

In the immune system, glutamine is involved in lymphocyte proliferation and cytokine production as well as macrophage and neutrophil function [286]. Low glutamine levels are associated with poor immunologic function and an increased risk of mortality in patients in the ICU [292,293].

Many patients who are critically ill or have undergone major surgery have low plasma and muscle glutamine levels [294]. Results from some studies suggest that glutamine reduces rates of infection and mortality in critically ill patients and reduces hospital length of stay and mortality in patients with burn injuries [292,294]. Clinical studies have administered glutamine both enterally and parenterally. When administered through these routes, glutamine is classified as a drug, not a dietary supplement, in the United States.
Efficacy
Critical illness (glutamine administered enterally or parenterally, not as a dietary supplement)

Researchers have examined whether glutamine administration affects immune parameters and disease prognosis in critically ill patients. Typical glutamine doses are 20 to 35 g/day or 0.3 to 0.5 g per kg body weight for parenteral administration [286]. The evidence from these studies is limited and mixed.

For example, a crossover trial examined the effects of enteral nutrition containing glutamine on immune function in moderately ill patients with systemic inflammatory response syndrome from a pulmonary infection in the ICU [295]. Thirty patients (age 30 to 92 years) received enteral nutrition containing 30 g added glutamine for 2 days followed by enteral nutrition containing 30 g added calcium caseinate for 2 days or the same formulations but in reverse order. A 1-day washout period with standard enteral nutrition separated each treatment period. Glutamine administration resulted in higher lymphocyte counts than calcium caseinate administration, suggesting enhanced immune function, but did not affect interleukin levels.

Results from clinical trials in patients with critical illness have also been mixed. One trial in the United Kingdom included 84 men and women (mean age 65 to 66 years) in the ICU [296]. Patients received a standard parenteral formulation with or without 25 g added glutamine per day. Treatment duration was not specified, but administration continued until death or as long as clinically required. Patients who received the formulation with added glutamine had a lower risk of death during the subsequent 6 months than those who received the standard formulation.

In another clinical trial in Scotland, 502 critically ill men and women (mean age 63 to 65 years) in the ICU received one of four parenteral treatments daily: standard formulation, standard formulation containing 20.2 g added glutamine, standard formulation containing 500 mcg added selenium, or standard formulation containing both glutamine and selenium for up to 7 days [297]. Glutamine did not affect the risk of new infections during the 14 days after randomization or mortality rates in the ICU or during the subsequent 6 months. It also had no effect on ICU or hospital length of stay, need for antibiotics, or rates of organ failure.

Findings from a 2014 Cochrane Review suggest that glutamine may have beneficial effects on some but not all outcomes in patients who have critical illness or are recovering from major surgery. This review examined the effects of glutamine administration on various outcomes, including rates of infection and mortality, in adults who were critically ill or had undergone major surgery, such as abdominal or thoracic surgery [294]. It included 53 clinical trials (including the two described above) in a total of 4,671 participants that administered glutamine enterally or parenterally. Glutamine administration resulted in a 21% lower risk of in-hospital infectious complications than placebo. It also reduced the length of hospital stay by about 3.5 days and number of days on mechanical ventilation by about 0.7 days. However, glutamine did not affect mortality rates, and it prolonged ICU stays by about 0.2 days.

The authors of a 2021 review that examined the effects of micronutrient supplementation, including glutamine, in adults with conditions or infections similar to COVID-19 concluded that evidence from human studies is very limited and that baseline nutrient status may affect study results [298]
Safety

Oral, enteral, and parenteral glutamine administration is considered safe [286,289,294]. Reported side effects are mainly gastrointestinal and include nausea, bloating, belching, pain, and flatulence [299].

Oral doses used in clinical trials in adults ranging from 3 to 45 g/day for up to 10 weeks have had no major adverse effects [289]. Other research suggests that oral doses up to 0.9 g/kg are well tolerated, although doses higher than 0.6 g/kg are more likely to produce gastrointestinal symptoms [299]. Children age 4 to 18 years tolerate doses of 0.35 to 0.65 g/kg well, but higher doses may cause vomiting [300].

The Food and Nutrition Board has not established a UL for glutamine [291]. The board notes that very few, if any, adverse effects have been reported from glutamine administration.

No reports have described clinically relevant interactions between glutamine and medications.
N-acetylcysteine and Glutathione

N-acetylcysteine (NAC) is a derivative of the amino acid cysteine. NAC is an antioxidant that has mucolytic activity, so it helps reduce respiratory mucus levels [301-303]. NAC might improve immune system function and suppress viral replication [302,304,305]. NAC also appears to decrease levels of interleukin-6 and have other anti-inflammatory effects [301,303,306].

Much of the research on NAC has used an inhaled, liquid form of this compound. This form—which is classified as a drug in the United States, not a dietary supplement—is approved by FDA as a mucolytic agent and for decreasing respiratory secretion viscosity [307]. NAC administered orally or intravenously also has FDA approval as a drug to treat acetaminophen poisoning [308,309]. Products containing NAC are also sold as dietary supplements [238].

In addition to its direct effects in the body, NAC raises intracellular levels of glutathione, which is a tripeptide of glutamine, cysteine, and glycine [301,304,306,310,311]. Laboratory and animal studies suggest that glutathione has antioxidant activity and appears to have antiviral and antimicrobial effects and enhance natural killer cell and neutrophil activity [304,309,312,313]. Glutathione may also have anti-inflammatory effects via altered cytokine expression [309,310,314]. Adequate glutathione levels are needed for optimal innate and adaptive immune system function, including proper T-cell activation and differentiation [310,312,314].

Most research indicates that oral glutathione supplementation does not raise intracellular glutathione levels because glutathione is hydrolyzed in the gastrointestinal tract [310]. As a result, NAC is often used in research studies because of its effects on intracellular glutathione levels.
Efficacy
HIV infection

HIV infection appears to increase production of free radicals and deplete levels of free glutathione [315]. Therefore, people with HIV may have decreased intracellular levels of glutathione, which could increase their susceptibility to infectious diseases, such as tuberculosis [309]. Low glutathione levels have been associated with shorter survival in people with HIV [316], and NAC supplementation increases blood and T-cell levels of glutathione [317]. However, clinical research on the effects of NAC supplementation on the immune system in humans is very limited.

In one clinical trial, researchers examined the effects of oral 600 to 6,000 mg NAC, depending on plasma glutamine levels, every other day for 7 months or placebo in 37 men and women with HIV who were taking ART [318]. An accompanying clinical trial (described in the same publication) evaluated the same treatment in 29 men and women with HIV who were not taking ART. NAC supplementation increased natural killer cell activity in both trials but did not affect CD4+ or CD8+ T-cell counts. In addition, NAC supplementation had inconsistent effects on viral load.
Safety

As an FDA-approved drug, the safety profile of NAC has been evaluated [307]. The American College of Chest Physicians and the Canadian Thoracic Society note that NAC has a low risk of adverse effects [319]. Typical doses are 600 mg/day, but up to 3,000 mg/day appears to be safe and well tolerated [320].

Reported side effects of oral NAC include nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, diarrhea, indigestion, and epigastric discomfort [309,321]. No safety concerns have been reported for products labeled as dietary supplements that contain NAC.

NAC might have anticoagulant effects and reduce blood pressure, so it could have additive effects if taken with anticoagulants and antihypertensive medications [322]. The combination of NAC and nitroglycerine, used to treat angina, can cause hypotension and severe headaches [323,324].

For information on NAC and COVID-19, please see the ODS health professional fact sheet, Dietary Supplements in the Time of COVID-19.
Omega-3 fatty acids

Omega-3 fatty acids (omega-3s) are polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) that are present in certain foods, such as flaxseed and fatty fish, as well as dietary supplements, such as those containing fish oil. Several omega-3s exist, including alpha linolenic acid (ALA), but most scientific research focuses on the long-chain omega-3s eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA). The main food sources of EPA and DHA are fatty fish and fish oil.

The Food and Nutrition Board established an adequate intake (AI; intake assumed to ensure nutritional adequacy) for total omega-3s of 0.5 g per day for infants, and an AI for ALA of 0.7 to 1.6 g per day for children and teens age 1 and older and 1.1 to 1.6 g per day for adults, including women who are pregnant and lactating [291]. The Food and Nutrition Board did not establish intake recommendations for EPA and DHA in 2005 because, unlike ALA, EPA and DHA were not classified as essential. Although ALA can be converted to EPA and then to DHA, less than 1% of ALA is converted to DHA [325]. Therefore, consuming EPA and DHA directly from foods and/or dietary supplements is the only practical way to increase levels of these fatty acids in the body.

Omega-3 fatty acids are components of the phospholipids that form the structures of cell membranes. Omega-3s also form eicosanoids, which are signaling molecules that affect the cardiovascular, pulmonary, immune, and endocrine systems [58,291,326].

Omega-6 fatty acids, the other major class of PUFAs, also form eicosanoids, which tend to be more potent mediators of inflammation, vasoconstriction, and platelet aggregation than those made from omega-3s. Therefore, higher concentrations of omega-3s than of omega-6s tip the eicosanoid balance toward less inflammatory activity [124,327,328].

Higher intakes and higher blood levels of EPA and DHA are associated with lower levels of inflammatory cytokines, such as interleukin-1 and interleukin-6 [311,327,329,330]. Immune system cells can easily incorporate EPA and DHA, which might also affect immune function by upregulating the activity of macrophages, neutrophils, T cells, B cells, natural killer cells, and other immune cells [2,327,331]. In addition, omega-3s may have antimicrobial and antiviral effects [58,332].

Omega-3 deficiency can cause rough, scaly skin and dermatitis [291]. Almost everyone in the United States obtains sufficient ALA to avoid deficiency, but many people might benefit from higher intakes of EPA and DHA [333]. For example, immuno-inflammatory function may be impaired below certain blood levels of DHA and/or EPA [334,335].
Efficacy
Acute respiratory distress syndrome

ARDS, a serious lung condition, is characterized by inflammation and multi-organ dysfunction that causes low blood oxygen levels. It usually results from another disease, such as COVID-19, or injury. ARDS has an in-hospital fatality rate of 27% to 45%, and survivors often have long-term physical, cognitive, and psychological impairments [336]. Because omega-3s can affect inflammation, researchers have hypothesized that these fatty acids might improve outcomes in patients with ARDS.

Several clinical trials and meta-analyses have examined whether omega-3s, administered enterally or parenterally (which are not classified as dietary supplements in the United States), benefit patients with ARDS. The authors of meta-analyses published in 2008 and 2011 concluded that these treatments reduce the risk of mortality and organ failure, improve oxygenation status, and reduce the length of ICU stay and time on mechanical ventilation [337,338].

However, more recent clinical trials and meta-analyses have yielded contrasting findings [336,339-342]. Some but not all findings were positive in one clinical trial with 58 men and women (mean age 63 to 64 years) who had mild to moderate ARDS, were on mechanical ventilation, and received a standard enteral formula that did or did not contain 720 mg omega-3s (including 360 mg EPA and 240 mg DHA) three times daily for 14 days [340]. Omega-3s improved some measures of oxygenation and lung function but did not affect number of ventilator-free days, length of ICU stay, 28-day mortality rates, or rates of multi-organ failure.

No benefits were found in another clinical trial in which 90 men and women (mean age 49 to 51 years) on mechanical ventilation who had acute lung injury, a mild form of ARDS, received either enteral fish oil containing 9,750 mg EPA and 6,750 mg DHA daily or placebo for 14 days [339]. Fish oil did not affect pulmonary or systematic inflammation, number of ventilator-free or ICU-free days, or rates of organ failure or 60-day mortality. Results were similar in a 2014 systematic review and meta-analysis that included seven clinical trials (one of which was the trial described above [339]) that compared enteral omega-3 supplementation with a control diet or placebo in a total of 955 adults with ARDS [341]. The most common omega-3s used were EPA and DHA, often in combination with gamma-linolenic acid (an omega-6 fatty acid); some studies also coadministered antioxidants. The results showed no differences in rates of 28-day all-cause mortality or numbers of ventilator-free days or ICU-free days, although omega-3 supplementation did improve oxygenation status at some time points.

The evidence was inconclusive in a 2019 Cochrane Review of 10 clinical trials (including the two trials described above) that included a total of 1,015 adults in ICUs and examined the effects of immunonutrition for ARDS [336]. The treatments consisted of EPA with or without DHA and gamma-linolenic acid for up to 28 days. One study also administered antioxidants. The treatment was administered enterally in nine studies and parenterally in one study. The omega-3 treatments did not affect all-cause mortality rates, but the quality of this evidence was low. The authors were unable to determine whether the treatments affected ICU length of stay, number of days on a ventilator, or oxygenation because the evidence was of very low quality.

In their guidelines on nutrition support therapy for adults who are critically ill, the Society of Critical Care Medicine and American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition state that they cannot recommend routine use of enteral formulas that contain omega-3s (or other anti-inflammatory lipids) in patients with ARDS because the data are conflicting [343].
Respiratory tract infections in infants and young children

Immune system development begins before birth and continues for several months to a few years [344]. The membranes of immune system cells contain long-chain PUFAs—including EPA, DHA, and the omega-6 fatty acid arachidonic acid (ARA)—that play a role in immune system development [344]. For this reason, researchers have examined whether consumption of infant formula enriched with long-chain PUFAs during the first year of life has health benefits. Much of this research has focused on the effects of these infant formulas on allergic manifestations, including atopic dermatitis, food allergies, and asthma, in infants and young children. However, researchers have also examined whether these formulas affect the risk of respiratory infections.

Several observational studies have examined whether infants who consume formula enriched with long-chain PUFAs during the first year of life have a lower risk of respiratory tract infections. Findings from these studies have been mixed, and some effects may depend on infant age and omega-3 dose. For example, an observational study analyzed data from 8,389 formula-fed infants born in France in 2011 [345]. At age 2 months, 26% of the infants consumed formula with added DHA and ARA only, and 11% consumed formula with added DHA, ARA, and EPA. The rest consumed unenriched formulas. Between age 2 months and 5.5 years, infants who consumed enriched formulas did not have a lower risk of upper or lower respiratory tract infections than those who consumed unenriched formulas. However, infants who consumed formulas containing 3.2 mg or more EPA per 100 kcal had a lower risk of lower respiratory tract infections than those who consumed unenriched formulas.

Findings were also mixed in an observational study of 1,342 infants who consumed infant formulas containing 17 mg/100 kcal DHA and 34 mg/100 kcal ARA or formulas with no DHA and ARA or lower levels [346]. Infants who consumed enriched formulas had lower rates of bronchitis or bronchiolitis at age 5, 7, and 9 months than those who consumed unenriched formulas or formulas with low levels of DHA and ARA. At age 12 months, infants consuming enriched formulas also had a lower risk of upper airway infections. However, the incidence of all other respiratory illnesses at various ages was similar between groups. In another observational study of 233 infants who consumed infant formula containing 17 mg/100 kcal DHA and 34 mg/100 kcal ARA and 92 infants who consumed unenriched formula, the enriched formula group had lower risks of croup, bronchitis or bronchiolitis, nasal congestion, and cough during the first year of life [347].

Very few clinical trials have examined the effects of infant formula containing added long-chain PUFAs on the risk of respiratory tract infections. A secondary analysis of two clinical trials included a total of 89 healthy formula-fed infants who received a standard infant formula with or without 17 mg/100 kcal DHA and 34 mg/100 kcal ARA for the first year of life [348]. Infants who received the formula containing DHA and ARA did not have a lower risk of nonallergic respiratory illnesses (e.g., upper respiratory infections, sinusitis, bronchitis, and pneumonia), but they did have a lower risk of common allergic diseases and symptoms, such as wheezing and asthma. In another clinical trial in Thailand, 180 healthy children age 9 to 12 years consumed milk containing fish oil (providing 200 mg EPA and 1,000 mg DHA per day) or placebo, 5 days per week for 6 months [349]. Only 54.3% of the children consuming fish oil became ill (mostly upper respiratory tract infections) compared with 67.4% of those who consumed placebo. Children consuming fish oil also had fewer episodes of illness and total days of illness. However, the percentage of children with fever did not differ between groups.

Safety

The Food and Nutrition Board did not establish a UL for omega-3s, although it noted that 900 mg/day EPA plus 600 mg/day DHA or more for several weeks might reduce immune function by suppressing inflammatory responses [291,350-354].

Doses of 2–15 g/day EPA and/or DHA might also increase bleeding time by reducing platelet aggregation [291]. However, according to the EFSA, long-term consumption of a combined dose of EPA and DHA supplements of up to about 5 g/day appears to be safe for adults [355]. EFSA also notes that these doses have not been shown to cause bleeding problems or to adversely affect immune function, glucose homeostasis, or lipid peroxidation. FDA has also concluded that dietary supplements providing no more than 5 g/day EPA and DHA are safe when used as recommended [356].

Commonly reported side effects of omega-3 supplements are usually mild and include unpleasant taste, bad breath, heartburn, nausea, gastrointestinal discomfort, diarrhea, headache, and odoriferous sweat [357,358]. Because of their antiplatelet effects, high doses of omega-3s might interact with anticoagulants [359]. However, according to the FDA-approved package inserts for omega-3 pharmaceutical preparations, studies have not found that these medications cause clinically significant bleeding episodes [360-362]. Omega-3s might also interact with other medications. For example, omega-3s might increase the risk of hypotension if taken with antihypertensive agents and might increase levels of cyclosporine, an immunosuppressant drug [363-365].

More information on omega-3s is available in the ODS health professional fact sheet on omega-3s.

For information on omega-3s and COVID-19, please see the ODS health professional fact sheet, Dietary Supplements in the Time of COVID-19.
Probiotics

Probiotics are live microorganisms that confer a health benefit on the host when administered in adequate amounts [366]. They include certain bacteria (e.g., Lactobacillus acidophilus, Lactobacillus rhamnosus, and Bifidobacterium longum) and yeasts (e.g., Saccharomyces boulardii). Probiotics are naturally present in some fermented foods, added to some food products, and available as dietary supplements.

Probiotics are identified by their strain, which includes the genus, the species, the subspecies (if applicable), and an alphanumeric strain designation [367]. The units of measure for probiotics are colony-forming units (CFUs), which indicate the number of viable cells. Common amounts used in dietary supplements are 1 x 109 (1 billion CFU; commonly designated as 109 CFU) and 1 x 1010 (10 billion or 1010 CFU).

Probiotics act mainly in the gastrointestinal tract [7]. They might improve immune function in several ways, including by enhancing gut barrier function, increasing immunoglobulin production, inhibiting viral replication, and enhancing the phagocytic activity of white blood cells. However, the mechanisms of their potential effects on immune function are unclear [7,368,369]. Some studies suggest that probiotics increase levels of natural killer cells, lymphocytes, and monocytes and that they decrease levels of proinflammatory cytokines, but other studies do not [370].

Interpreting the results of probiotics research is especially challenging because findings for one probiotic strain cannot be extrapolated to others [7,371].

Efficacy
Acute infectious diarrhea in infants and children

Probiotics might reduce the risk of infectious diarrhea and help manage its symptoms by stimulating the immune system and by secreting antimicrobial substances. In addition, they might limit the ability of pathogenic bacteria to colonize, adhere to, and invade the gut by competing for available nutrients and binding sites [372-374].

Clinical trials have used a wide range of probiotic preparations, and results from these studies have been mixed. Several earlier clinical trials showed some beneficial effects of probiotics on acute infectious diarrhea in infants and children. In one of these trials, 64 indigenous children in Australia age 4 months to 2 years admitted to the hospital with acute diarrhea took 5 X 109 CFU Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG (LGG) three times per day or placebo for 3 days [375]. A smaller proportion of children who took LGG had diarrhea on day 2. However, probiotics did not affect the small intestine’s functional absorptive capacity. In addition, the duration of diarrhea, total number of diarrhea stools, and diarrhea severity did not differ between groups. Another trial included 88 children in an urban middle-class population (country not specified) age 3 to 24 months who had acute mild to moderate diarrhea [376]. Infants younger than 1 year took 250 mg/day Saccharomyces boulardii, and older children took 500 mg/day or placebo for 6 days. Diarrhea duration was shorter (4.7 days) in children who took Saccharomyces boulardii than those who took placebo (6.2 days). Saccharomyces boulardii users also had fewer stools on the fourth day and were less likely to have persistent diarrhea for more than 7 days. In addition, subgroup analyses showed that the probiotic was more effective when administered within the first 48 hours of diarrhea onset.

Findings were positive in a Cochrane Review of 63 clinical trials (including the two described above) in a total of 8,014 participants (primarily infants and children). Types of probiotics and treatment schedules varied widely, but 15 studies used more than 1 X 1010 CFU per day, 26 used 1 X 1010 CFU per day or less, and in 22 studies the dose was unclear. The results showed that single- and multi-strain probiotics shortened the duration of acute infectious diarrhea by about 25 hours [373]. The probiotics also decreased the risk that the diarrhea would last 4 or more days by 59% and led to approximately one less bowel movement on the second day in patients who received probiotics than in patients who did not.

Research conducted through 2015 indicated that two strains—LGG and Saccharomyces boulardii—had the strongest evidence of efficacy [374]. A meta-analysis of 11 clinical trials with a total of 2,444 children showed that LGG reduced the duration of infectious diarrhea by about 1 day more than placebo or no treatment, and it was most effective at a daily dose of at least 1010 CFU [377]. Similarly, a review of 22 clinical trials with a total of 2,440 participants age 1 month to 15 years found that Saccharomyces boulardii (most commonly 109 to 1010 CFU/day for 5–10 days) reduced the duration of diarrhea by 19.7 hours, reduced stool frequency on days 2 and 3, and lowered the risk of diarrhea on days 3 and 4 [378].

Using its requirement of at least two adequate and well-controlled studies—each convincing on its own—to establish an intervention’s effectiveness, the European Society for Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition (ESPGHAN) found that evidence supports the use of LGG (typically at least 1010 CFU/day for 5–7 days) and Saccharomyces boulardii (typically 250–750 mg/day [109–1010 CFU] for 5–7 days) in combination with rehydration for managing acute infectious diarrhea in pediatric patients [379].

However, results from recent clinical trials have largely failed to show that probiotics benefit children with acute infectious diarrhea [380,381]. For example, a clinical trial in 971 participants age 3 months to 4 years with acute gastroenteritis presenting to U.S. pediatric emergency departments found that 1 x 1010 CFU LGG twice per day for 5 days was no better than placebo for improving outcomes [381]. In a similar trial, a combination probiotic containing 4 x 109 CFU L rhamnosus R0011 and L helveticus R0052 twice daily did not prevent the development of moderate to severe gastroenteritis within 14 days of enrollment compared with placebo in 886 Canadian children age 3 to 40 months with gastroenteritis [380]. Results were similar in a 2020 Cochrane Review of probiotics for treating acute infectious diarrhea that included 82 clinical trials in a total of 12,127 participants (mostly children younger than 18 years), and about two-thirds of the trials were conducted in countries with low or very low child and adult mortality rates [382]. The probiotics did not reduce the risk of diarrhea lasting 48 hours or longer. In addition, probiotics did not affect the duration of diarrhea, although this evidence was of very low certainty.

In 2020, based on these and other more recent trials, ESPGHAN downgraded its recommendations from strong to weak for the use of LGG and Saccharomyces boulardii in infants and children with acute gastroenteritis [383]. ESPGHAN also made recommendations it characterized as weak for L reuteri DSM 179038 (1 x 108 to 4 x 108 CFU/day for 5 days) as well as L rhamnosus 19070-2 and L reuteri DSM 12246 (each 2 x 1010 CFU/day for 5 days) in combination with rehydration for managing acute gastroenteritis in pediatric patients.
Common cold, influenza, and other respiratory tract infections

Probiotics might reduce the risk of respiratory tract infections and shorten the duration of illness, possibly by stimulating the immune system and inhibiting viral replication [7].

Most clinical trials that have examined whether probiotics reduce the risk of respiratory tract infections in infants, children, and adults have had positive findings. For example, one clinical trial assessed whether probiotics affect the incidence and duration of cold and flu-like symptoms in 326 healthy children age 3 to 5 years [384]. Participants took Lactobacillus acidophilus NCFM (1 x 1010 CFU total daily dose) twice daily, Lactobacillus acidophilus NCFM plus Bifidobacterium animalis subsp lactis Bi-07 (1 x 1010 CFU total daily dose), or placebo for 6 months from November to May. Lactobacillus acidophilus alone or in combination with Bifidobacterium animalis reduced the incidence and duration of fever and cough as well as the use of antibiotics. In addition, participants who took Lactobacillus acidophilus alone or with Bifidobacterium animalis had significantly fewer childcare absences than participants who took placebo. Findings were similar in a clinical trial in 898 healthy men and women age 18 to 70 years who took 1 x 109 CFU Lactiplantibacillus plantarum HEAL9 and Lacticaseibacillus paracasei 8700:2 or placebo daily for 12 weeks from October to February [385]. Among participants experiencing at least one cold, those who took probiotics had fewer colds (mean of 1.24 colds) than those who took placebo (mean of 1.36 colds), but symptom severity did not differ between groups.

Systematic reviews and meta-analyses that have evaluated the use of probiotics to prevent or treat respiratory tract infections in children and adults have all found beneficial effects on some outcomes [386-390]. For example, a systematic review and meta-analysis included 20 clinical trials that examined the effects of Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium on acute respiratory tract infections in children age 12 months to 12 years or adults [387]. Participants took Lactobacillus strains, Lactobacillus plus Bifidobacterium strains, or placebo for 3 weeks to 7 months, mostly during the winter. The probiotics had modest but statistically significant effects, reducing the number of days of illness per person by about a third of a day; shortening the duration of illness by almost a day; and reducing the number of days absent from day care, school, or work by about 4 hours in comparison with placebo.

Probiotics were also found to be beneficial in a Cochrane Review of probiotic supplementation to prevent acute upper respiratory tract infections that combined findings from 12 clinical trials in a total of 3,720 children and adults [369]. The studies tested a wide variety of probiotics, including single and multiple strains, and most trials administered 109 to 1010 CFU/day for 3 months or longer. Probiotics reduced the risk of developing at least one acute upper respiratory tract infection by 47% and shortened the duration of illness by 1.89 days in comparison with placebo. However, the evidence was of low quality. The authors concluded that probiotics might help prevent acute upper respiratory tract infections.

Results from a more recent meta-analysis also support the use of probiotics for respiratory tract infections. It included 39 studies in a total of 8,046 nonelderly, mostly healthy men and women that tested various probiotic strains, including Lactobacillus, Bifidobacterium, Enterococcus, and Lactococcus [386]. Probiotics reduced the risk of developing one or more respiratory tract infections by 9%, the duration of illness by 0.23 days, and the severity of symptoms.

One challenge with evaluating the findings of clinical trials of probiotics is that the effects of probiotics appear to vary by strain. This is illustrated by a cohort study in France that followed 8,389 children from birth until age 5.5 years [391]. At age 2 months, 57.4% of the children consumed infant formula enriched with various probiotic strains, and 42.6% consumed formula without probiotics. Children who consumed formula containing Bifidobacterium lactis (BB12) at age 2 months had a 16% lower risk of lower respiratory tract infections until at least age 5.5 years than those who consumed formula not containing probiotics. However, consumption of formula with other strains of Bifidobacterium or with Lactobacillus or Streptococcus did not affect the risk of lower respiratory tract infections. In addition, the results showed no correlations between consumption of formula containing any of the probiotic strains at age 2 months and risk of upper respiratory tract infections.

Another challenge is that more than 200 types of viruses can cause respiratory infections, and the effects of probiotics may vary by virus [7]. Research in free-living participants cannot be constrained to a preselected virus, so some researchers have addressed this issue by experimentally inducing respiratory tract infections caused by a single virus. One of these studies examined the effects of Bifidobacterium animalis subspecies lactis B1-04 in 152 healthy young men and women (mean age 22 to 23 years) who were exposed to rhinovirus (RV)-A39 [392]. Participants took 2 x 109 CFU daily of the probiotic or placebo for 28 days before the RV-A39 challenge and for 5 days afterward. Probiotic supplements reduced the chemokine ligand 8 response to the rhinovirus infection, suggesting less severe symptoms. The supplementation also reduced the virus titer and proportion of participants shedding virus in their nasal secretions. However, the probiotic did not affect symptom scores, infection rates, or levels of lower respiratory inflammation.
Ventilator-associated pneumonia

Studies examining whether probiotics reduce the risk of ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP) in people who are critically ill have had inconsistent findings.

Some findings were positive in a 2010 trial that randomized 146 male and female patients, mean age 53 to 55 years, on mechanical ventilation to placebo or enteral 2 x 109 CFU LGG twice daily until extubation, tracheostomy placement, or death [393]. Only 19.1% of the LGG group developed VAP, whereas the rate was 40.0% in those treated with placebo. In contrast, enteral LGG (1 x 1010 CFUs twice daily for a median of 9 days) did not reduce the risk of VAP in another clinical trial in 2,653 critically ill patients (mean age 59.8 years) in the ICU [394].

A 2022 systematic review and meta-analysis also had mixed findings. It included 18 clinical trials (including the two trials described above) in a total of 4,893 adult patients on mechanical ventilation in the ICU [395]. Twelve of the trials used probiotic supplementation (mostly Lactobacillus), and six used synbiotics (combinations of probiotics and prebiotics). Evidence of low certainty showed that probiotics reduced the incidence of VAP by 32%. However, the effect was not statistically significant in double-blind studies or in studies with a low risk of bias. According to evidence of moderate certainty, probiotics also reduced the length of ICU stay by about 2.2 days.

Similar findings were reported in a 2014 Cochrane Review that included eight clinical trials in a total of 1,083 participants [396]. These trials examined the effects of various strains of probiotics, including Lactobacillus, Bifidobacterium, and Streptococcus. The probiotics decreased the incidence of VAP by 30%. However, the authors noted that the quality of this evidence was low. Furthermore, probiotics did not affect rates of ICU mortality or in-hospital mortality, incidence of diarrhea, length of ICU stay, or duration of mechanical ventilation, according to evidence of very low quality.

Other reviews have had mixed findings [397-400], and many review authors have noted that significant trial heterogeneity, risk of bias, or both hinder evaluation of the available evidence [395,397,399].
Safety

Probiotics, such as strains of Lactobacillus, Bifidobacterium, and Propionibacterium, have a long history of use in foods and are often present in the normal gastrointestinal microbiota, indicating that probiotic supplements are safe for most people [368]. Side effects, which are usually minor, include gastrointestinal symptoms, such as gas [7,369]. However, potential safety concerns can include systemic infections, especially in people who are immunocompromised [368]. For example, in a few cases, mainly in people who were severely ill or immunocompromised, the use of probiotics was linked to bacteremia, fungemia (fungi in the blood), or infections that resulted in severe illness [401,402].

Probiotics are not known to interact with medications. However, antibiotic and antifungal medications might decrease the effectiveness of some probiotics [403,404].

More information on probiotics is available in the ODS health professional fact sheet on probiotics.

For information on probiotics and COVID-19, please see the ODS health professional fact sheet, Dietary Supplements in the Time of COVID-19.
References

    Parkin J, Cohen B. An overview of the immune system. Lancet 2001;357:1777-89. [PubMed abstract]
    Calder PC, Carr AC, Gombart AF, Eggersdorfer M. Optimal nutritional status for a well-functioning immune system is an important factor to protect against viral infections. Nutrients 2020;12. [PubMed abstract]
    Brendler T, Al-Harrasi A, Bauer R, Gafner S, Hardy ML, et al. Botanical drugs and supplements affecting the immune response in the time of COVID-19: Implications for research and clinical practice. Phytother Res 2020. [PubMed abstract]
    Gombart AF, Pierre A, Maggini S. A review of micronutrients and the immune system-working in harmony to reduce the risk of infection. Nutrients 2020;12. [PubMed abstract]
    Haggerty PA. Medical Nutrition Therapy for Infectious Diseases. In: Raymond JL, Morrow K, eds. Krause and Mahan's Food and the Nutrition Care Process, 16th Edition: Elsevier; 2022.
    Chen L, Deng H, Cui H, Fang J, Zuo Z, et al. Inflammatory responses and inflammation-associated diseases in organs. Oncotarget 2018;9:7204-18. [PubMed abstract]
    Lehtoranta L, Latvala S, Lehtinen MJ. Role of probiotics in stimulating the immune system in viral respiratory tract infections: A narrative review. Nutrients 2020;12. [PubMed abstract]
    Collins N, Belkaid Y. Control of immunity via nutritional interventions. Immunity 2022;55:210-23. [PubMed abstract]
    Venturi S, Venturi M. Iodine, thymus, and immunity. Nutrition 2009;25:977-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Beck MA. Selenium and vitamin E status: Impact on viral pathogenicity. J Nutr 2007;137:1338-40. [PubMed abstract]
    Albers R, Antoine JM, Bourdet-Sicard R, Calder PC, Gleeson M, et al. Markers to measure immunomodulation in human nutrition intervention studies. Br J Nutr 2005;94:452-81. [PubMed abstract]
    Albers R, Bourdet-Sicard R, Braun D, Calder PC, Herz U, et al. Monitoring immune modulation by nutrition in the general population: Identifying and substantiating effects on human health. Br J Nutr 2013;110 Suppl 2:S1-30. [PubMed abstract]
    Hemilä H, Chalker E. Vitamin C for preventing and treating the common cold. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2013:Cd000980. [PubMed abstract]
    Barazzoni R, Bischoff SC, Breda J, Wickramasinghe K, Krznaric Z, et al. ESPEN expert statements and practical guidance for nutritional management of individuals with SARS-CoV-2 infection. Clin Nutr 2020;39:1631-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Calder PC. Nutrition, immunity and COVID-19. BMJ Nutr Prev Health 2020;3:74-92. [PubMed abstract]
    Zabetakis I, Lordan R, Norton C, Tsoupras A. COVID-19: The inflammation link and the role of nutrition in potential mitigation. Nutrients 2020;12. [PubMed abstract]
    Lee GY, Han SN. The role of vitamin E in immunity. Nutrients 2018;10. [PubMed abstract]
    Jayawardena R, Sooriyaarachchi P, Chourdakis M, Jeewandara C, Ranasinghe P. Enhancing immunity in viral infections, with special emphasis on COVID-19: A review. Diabetes Metab Syndr 2020;14:367-82. [PubMed abstract]
    Collins JF. Copper. In: Marriott BP, Birt DF, Stallings VA, Yates AA, eds. Present Knowledge in Nutrition 11th ed. Cambridge, MA: Elsevier; 2020:409-27.
    Raha S, Mallick R, Basak S, Duttaroy AK. Is copper beneficial for COVID-19 patients? Med Hypotheses 2020;142:109814. [PubMed abstract]
    Dominguez LJ, Veronese N, Guerrero-Romero F, Barbagallo M. Magnesium in infectious diseases in older people. Nutrients 2021;13. [PubMed abstract]
    DiNicolantonio JJ, O'Keefe JH. Magnesium and vitamin D deficiency as a potential cause of immune dysfunction, cytokine storm and disseminated intravascular coagulation in covid-19 patients. Mo Med 2021;118:68-73. [PubMed abstract]
    Pooransari P, Pourdowlat G. Magnesium sulfate: A potential adjuvant treatment on COVID-19. Frontiers in Emergency Medicine 2021;5:e1.
    Iotti S, Wolf F, Mazur A, Maier JA. The COVID-19 pandemic: Is there a role for magnesium? Hypotheses and perspectives. Magnes Res 2020;33:21-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Shakoor H, Feehan J, Al Dhaheri AS, Ali HI, Platat C, et al. Immune-boosting role of vitamins D, C, E, zinc, selenium and omega-3 fatty acids: Could they help against COVID-19? Maturitas 2021;143:1-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Maier JA, Castiglioni S, Locatelli L, Zocchi M, Mazur A. Magnesium and inflammation: Advances and perspectives. Semin Cell Dev Biol 2021;115:37-44. [PubMed abstract]
    Alexander J, Tinkov A, Strand TA, Alehagen U, Skalny A, et al. Early nutritional interventions with zinc, selenium and vitamin D for raising anti-viral resistance against progressive COVID-19. Nutrients 2020;12. [PubMed abstract]
    Naidu A, Pressman P, Clemens R. Coronavirus and nutrition: What is the evidence for dietary supplements usage for COVID-19 control and management? Nutrition Today 2021;Publish Ahead of Print.
    Institute of Medicine. Food and Nutrition Board. Dietary Reference Intakes for Vitamin A, Vitamin K, Arsenic, Boron, Chromium, Copper, Iodine, Iron, Manganese, Molybdenum, Nickel, Silicon, Vanadium, and Zinc. Washington, DC: National Academy Press; 2001. [PubMed abstract]
    Huang Z, Liu Y, Qi G, Brand D, Zheng SG. Role of Vitamin A in the immune system. J Clin Med 2018;7. [PubMed abstract]
    Sinopoli A, Caminada S, Isonne C, Santoro MM, Baccolini V. What are the effects of vitamin A oral supplementation in the prevention and management of viral infections? A systematic review of randomized clinical trials. Nutrients 2022;14. [PubMed abstract]
    Crawford C, Brown LL, Costello RB, Deuster PA. Select dietary supplement ingredients for preserving and protecting the immune system in healthy individuals: A systematic review. Nutrients 2022;14:4604. [PubMed abstract]
    Imdad A, Mayo-Wilson E, Haykal MR, Regan A, Sidhu J, Smith A, Bhutta ZA. Vitamin A supplementation for preventing morbidity and mortality in children from six months to five years of age. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2022 Mar 16;3(3):CD008524. [PubMed abstract]
    Wiseman EM, Bar-El Dadon S, Reifen R. The vicious cycle of vitamin a deficiency: A review. Crit Rev Food Sci Nutr 2017;57:3703-14. [PubMed abstract]
    Blaner WS. Vitamin A and Provitamin A Carotenoids In: Marriott BP, Birt DF, Stallings VA, Yates AA, eds. Present Knowledge in Nutrition. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Wiley-Blackwell; 2020:73-91.
    Bailey RL, West KP, Jr., Black RE. The epidemiology of global micronutrient deficiencies. Ann Nutr Metab 2015;66 Suppl 2:22-33. [PubMed abstract]
    World Health Organization. Guideline: Vitamin A supplementation in infants and children 6-59 months of age. 2011.
    Baye K, Laillou A, Seyoum Y, Zvandaziva C, Chimanya K, et al. Estimates of child mortality reductions attributed to vitamin A supplementation in sub-Saharan Africa: Scale-up, scale-back, or re-focus? Am J Clin Nutr 2022. [PubMed abstract]
    Stevens GA, Bennett JE, Hennocq Q, Lu Y, De-Regil LM, et al. Trends and mortality effects of vitamin A deficiency in children in 138 low-income and middle-income countries between 1991 and 2013: A pooled analysis of population-based surveys. Lancet Glob Health 2015;3:e528-36. [PubMed abstract]
    Mayo-Wilson E, Imdad A, Herzer K, Yakoob MY, Bhutta ZA. Vitamin A supplements for preventing mortality, illness, and blindness in children aged under 5: Systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ 2011;343:d5094. [PubMed abstract]
    Imdad A, Ahmed Z, Bhutta ZA. Vitamin A supplementation for the prevention of morbidity and mortality in infants one to six months of age. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2016;9:Cd007480. [PubMed abstract]
    Huey SL, Mehta S. Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Vitamin A. In: Mehta S, Finkelstein JL, eds. Nutrition and HIV: Epidemiological Evidence to Public Health. New York (NY): CRC Press © 2018 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC CRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, an Informa business.; 2018:1-26. [PubMed abstract]
    Battistini Garcia SA, Guzman N. Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome CD4+ Count. In: StatPearls. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing Copyright © 2022, StatPearls Publishing LLC.; 2022. [PubMed abstract]
    Kemnic TR, Gulick PG. HIV Antiretroviral Therapy. In: StatPearls. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing Copyright © 2022, StatPearls Publishing LLC.; 2022. [PubMed abstract]
    Irlam JH, Siegfried N, Visser ME, Rollins NC. Micronutrient supplementation for children with HIV infection. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2013:Cd010666. [PubMed abstract]
    Visser ME, Durao S, Sinclair D, Irlam JH, Siegfried N. Micronutrient supplementation in adults with HIV infection. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2017;5:Cd003650. [PubMed abstract]
    Wiysonge CS, Ndze VN, Kongnyuy EJ, Shey MS. Vitamin A supplements for reducing mother-to-child HIV transmission. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2017;9:Cd003648. [PubMed abstract]
    World Health Organization. Guideline: Vitamin A supplementation in pregnancy for reducing the risk of mother-to-child transmission of HIV 2011. [PubMed abstract]
    Gebremedhin S. Postpartum vitamin A supplementation for HIV-positive women is not associated with mortality and morbidity of their breastfed infants: Evidence from multiple national surveys in sub-Saharan Africa. BMC Pediatr 2020;20:214. [PubMed abstract]
    World Health Organization. Measles. 2024.
    Wang X, Li X, Jin C, Bai X, Qi X, et al. Association between serum vitamin A levels and recurrent respiratory tract infections in children. Front Pediatr 2021;9:756217. [PubMed abstract]
    Hu N, Li QB, Zou SY. [Effect of vitamin A as an adjuvant therapy for pneumonia in children: A meta analysis]. Zhongguo Dang Dai Er Ke Za Zhi 2018;20:146-53. [PubMed abstract]
    Zhang Y, Lu Y, Wang S, Yang L, Xia H, et al. Excessive vitamin A supplementation increased the incidence of acute respiratory tract infections: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Nutrients 2021;13. [PubMed abstract]
    Vlieg-Boerstra B, de Jong N, Meyer R, Agostoni C, De Cosmi V, et al. Nutrient supplementation for prevention of viral respiratory tract infections in healthy subjects: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Allergy 2022;77:1373-88. [PubMed abstract]
    LiverTox. Vitamin A. In: LiverTox: Clinical and Research Information on Drug-Induced Liver Injury. Bethesda (MD): National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases; 2020. [PubMed abstract]
    Institute of Medicine. Food and Nutrition Board. Dietary Reference Intakes for Vitamin C, Vitamin E, Selenium, and Carotenoids Washington, DC: National Academy Press; 2000. [PubMed abstract]
    Ulbricht C, Basch E, Chao W, Conquer J, Costa D, et al. An evidence-based systematic review of vitamin A by the natural standard research collaboration. J Diet Suppl 2012;9:299-416. [PubMed abstract]
    Eggersdorfer M, Berger MM, Calder PC, Gombart AF, Ho E, et al. Perspective: Role of micronutrients and omega-3 long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids for immune outcomes of relevance to infections in older adults - A narrative review and call for action. Adv Nutr 2022. [PubMed abstract]
    Holford P, Carr AC, Jovic TH, Ali SR, Whitaker IS, et al. Vitamin C-An adjunctive therapy for respiratory infection, sepsis and COVID-19. Nutrients 2020;12. [PubMed abstract]
    Carr AC, Maggini S. Vitamin C and immune function. Nutrients 2017;9. [PubMed abstract]
    Jacob RA, Sotoudeh G. Vitamin C function and status in chronic disease. Nutr Clin Care 2002;5:66-74. [PubMed abstract]
    National Institutes of Health. COVID-19 Treatment Guidelines, Vitamin C. 2022.
    Johnston CS. Vitamin C. In: Marriott BP, Birt DF, Stallings VA, Yates AA, eds. Present Knowledge in Nutrition 11th ed. Cambridge, MA: Elsevier; 2020:155-69.
    Hemilä H. Vitamin C and infections. Nutrients 2017;9. [PubMed abstract]
    Schleicher RL, Carroll MD, Ford ES, Lacher DA. Serum vitamin C and the prevalence of vitamin C deficiency in the United States: 2003-2004 National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES). Am J Clin Nutr 2009;90:1252-63. [PubMed abstract]
    Peters EM, Goetzsche JM, Grobbelaar B, Noakes TD. Vitamin C supplementation reduces the incidence of postrace symptoms of upper-respiratory-tract infection in ultramarathon runners. Am J Clin Nutr 1993;57:170-4. [PubMed abstract]
    Abioye AI, Bromage S, Fawzi W. Effect of micronutrient supplements on influenza and other respiratory tract infections among adults: A systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ Glob Health 2021;6. [PubMed abstract]
    Johnston CS, Barkyoumb GM, Schumacher SS. Vitamin C supplementation slightly improves physical activity levels and reduces cold incidence in men with marginal vitamin C status: A randomized controlled trial. Nutrients 2014;6:2572-83. [PubMed abstract]
    Lamontagne F, Masse MH, Menard J, Sprague S, Pinto R, et al. Intravenous vitamin C in adults with sepsis in the intensive care unit. N Engl J Med 2022;386:2387-98. [PubMed abstract]
    Fowler AA, 3rd, Truwit JD, Hite RD, Morris PE, DeWilde C, et al. Effect of vitamin C infusion on organ failure and biomarkers of inflammation and vascular injury in patients with sepsis and severe acute respiratory failure: The CITRIS-ALI randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2019;322:1261-70. [PubMed abstract]
    Patel JJ, Ortiz-Reyes A, Dhaliwal R, Clarke J, Hill A, et al. IV vitamin C in critically Ill patients: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Crit Care Med 2022;50:e304-e12. [PubMed abstract]
    Fujii T, Salanti G, Belletti A, Bellomo R, Carr A, et al. Effect of adjunctive vitamin C, glucocorticoids, and vitamin B1 on longer-term mortality in adults with sepsis or septic shock: A systematic review and a component network meta-analysis. Intensive Care Med 2022;48:16-24. [PubMed abstract]
    Cho J, Ahn S, Yim J, Cheon Y, Jeong SH, et al. Influence of vitamin C and maltose on the accuracy of three models of glucose meters. Ann Lab Med 2016;36:271-4. [PubMed abstract]
    Lv H, Zhang GJ, Kang XX, Yuan H, Lv YW, et al. Factors interfering with the accuracy of five blood glucose meters used in Chinese hospitals. J Clin Lab Anal 2013;27:354-66.
    Tang Z, Du X, Louie RF, Kost GJ. Effects of drugs on glucose measurements with handheld glucose meters and a portable glucose analyzer. Am J Clin Pathol 2000;113:75-86. [PubMed abstract]
    Lawenda BD, Kelly KM, Ladas EJ, Sagar SM, Vickers A, et al. Should supplemental antioxidant administration be avoided during chemotherapy and radiation therapy? J Natl Cancer Inst 2008;100:773-83. [PubMed abstract]
    Skelin M, Lucijanić T, Amidžić Klarić D, Rešić A, Bakula M, et al. Factors affecting gastrointestinal absorption of levothyroxine: A review. Clin Ther 2017;39:378-403. [PubMed abstract]
    Institute of Medicine. Food and Nutrition Board. Dietary Reference Intakes for Calcium and Vitamin D. Washington, DC: National Academy Press; 2010. [PubMed abstract]
    Iddir M, Brito A, Dingeo G, Fernandez Del Campo SS, Samouda H, et al. Strengthening the immune system and reducing inflammation and oxidative stress through diet and nutrition: Considerations during the COVID-19 crisis. Nutrients 2020;12. [PubMed abstract]
    Martens PJ, Gysemans C, Verstuyf A, Mathieu AC. Vitamin D's effect on immune function. Nutrients 2020;12. [PubMed abstract]
    Charoenngam N, Holick MF. Immunologic effects of vitamin D on human health and disease. Nutrients 2020;12. [PubMed abstract]
    Siddiqui M, Manansala JS, Abdulrahman HA, Nasrallah GK, Smatti MK, et al. Immune modulatory effects of vitamin D on viral infections. Nutrients 2020;12. [PubMed abstract]
    Corrao S, Bocchio RM, Lo Monaco M, Natoli G, Cavezzi A, et al. Does evidence exist to blunt inflammatory response by nutraceutical supplementation during COVID-19 pandemic? An overview of systematic reviews of vitamin D, vitamin C, melatonin, and zinc. Nutrients 2021;13. [PubMed abstract]
    Fakhoury HMA, Kvietys PR, Shakir I, Shams H, Grant WB, et al. Lung-centric inflammation of COVID-19: Potential modulation by vitamin D. Nutrients 2021;13. [PubMed abstract]
    Gruber-Bzura BM. Vitamin D and influenza-prevention or therapy? Int J Mol Sci 2018;19. [PubMed abstract]
    Arboleda JF, Urcuqui-Inchima S. Vitamin D supplementation: A potential approach for coronavirus/COVID-19 therapeutics? Front Immunol 2020;11:1523. [PubMed abstract]
    Grant WB, Lahore H, McDonnell SL, Baggerly CA, French CB, et al. Evidence that vitamin D supplementation could reduce risk of influenza and COVID-19 infections and deaths. Nutrients 2020;12. [PubMed abstract]
    National Institutes of Health. COVID-19 Treatment Guidelines, Vitamin D. 2022.
    Rubin R. Sorting out whether vitamin D deficiency raises COVID-19 risk. JAMA 2021. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Department of Agriculture ARS. Percent reporting and mean amounts of selected vitamins and minerals food and beverages and dietary supplements by gender and age, in the United States, 2015-2016. What We Eat in America, NHANES 2015-2016, 2019.
    Herrick KA, Storandt RJ, Afful J, Pfeiffer CM, Schleicher RL, et al. Vitamin D status in the United States, 2011-2014. Am J Clin Nutr 2019;110:150-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Lanham-New SA, Webb AR, Cashman KD, Buttriss JL, Fallowfield JL, et al. Vitamin D and SARS-CoV-2 virus/COVID-19 disease. BMJ Nutr Prev Health 2020;3:106-10. [PubMed abstract]
    Ginde AA, Mansbach JM, Camargo CA, Jr. Association between serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D level and upper respiratory tract infection in the Third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. Arch Intern Med 2009;169:384-90. [PubMed abstract]
    Brenner H, Holleczek B, Schöttker B. Vitamin D insufficiency and deficiency and mortality from respiratory diseases in a cohort of older adults: Potential for limiting the death toll during and beyond the COVID-19 pandemic? Nutrients 2020;12. [PubMed abstract]
    Urashima M, Segawa T, Okazaki M, Kurihara M, Wada Y, et al. Randomized trial of vitamin D supplementation to prevent seasonal influenza A in schoolchildren. Am J Clin Nutr 2010;91:1255-60. [PubMed abstract]
    Li-Ng M, Aloia JF, Pollack S, Cunha BA, Mikhail M, et al. A randomized controlled trial of vitamin D3 supplementation for the prevention of symptomatic upper respiratory tract infections. Epidemiol Infect 2009;137:1396-404. [PubMed abstract]
    Ganmaa D, Uyanga B, Zhou X, Gantsetseg G, Delgerekh B, et al. Vitamin D supplements for prevention of tuberculosis infection and disease. N Engl J Med 2020;383:359-68. [PubMed abstract]
    Yakoob MY, Salam RA, Khan FR, Bhutta ZA. Vitamin D supplementation for preventing infections in children under five years of age. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2016;11:Cd008824. [PubMed abstract]
    Martineau AR, Jolliffe DA, Hooper RL, Greenberg L, Aloia JF, et al. Vitamin D supplementation to prevent acute respiratory tract infections: Systematic review and meta-analysis of individual participant data. BMJ 2017;356:i6583. [PubMed abstract]
    Jolliffe DA, Camargo CA, Jr., Sluyter JD, Aglipay M, Aloia JF, et al. Vitamin D supplementation to prevent acute respiratory infections: A systematic review and meta-analysis of aggregate data from randomised controlled trials. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2021;9:276-92. [PubMed abstract]
    Bergman P, Lindh AU, Björkhem-Bergman L, Lindh JD. Vitamin D and respiratory tract infections: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. PLoS One 2013;8:e65835. [PubMed abstract]
    Zhu Z, Zhu X, Gu L, Zhan Y, Chen L, et al. Association between vitamin D and influenza: Meta-analysis and systematic review of randomized controlled trials. Front Nutr 2021;8:799709. [PubMed abstract]
    Charan J, Goyal JP, Saxena D, Yadav P. Vitamin D for prevention of respiratory tract infections: A systematic review and meta-analysis. J Pharmacol Pharmacother 2012;3:300-3. [PubMed abstract]
    Zhou YF, Luo BA, Qin LL. The association between vitamin D deficiency and community-acquired pneumonia: A meta-analysis of observational studies. Medicine (Baltimore) 2019;98:e17252. [PubMed abstract]
    Pham H, Rahman A, Majidi A, Waterhouse M, Neale RE. Acute respiratory tract infection and 25-hydroxyvitamin D concentration: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Int J Environ Res Public Health 2019;16. [PubMed abstract]
    Cho HE, Myung SK, Cho H. Efficacy of Vitamin D supplements in prevention of acute respiratory infection: A meta-analysis for randomized controlled trials. Nutrients 2022;14. [PubMed abstract]
    Brunvoll SH, Nygaard AB, Ellingjord-Dale M, Holland P, Istre MS, et al. Prevention of covid-19 and other acute respiratory infections with cod liver oil supplementation, a low dose vitamin D supplement: Quadruple blinded, randomised placebo controlled trial. BMJ 2022;378:e071245. [PubMed abstract]
    Jolliffe DA, Holt H, Greenig M, Talaei M, Perdek N, et al. Effect of a test-and-treat approach to vitamin D supplementation on risk of all cause acute respiratory tract infection and covid-19: Phase 3 randomised controlled trial (CORONAVIT). BMJ 2022;378:e071230. [PubMed abstract]
    Cho H, Myung SK, Cho HE. Efficacy of vitamin D supplements in treatment of acute respiratory infection: A meta-analysis for randomized controlled trials. Nutrients 2022;14. [PubMed abstract]
    Holick MF, Binkley NC, Bischoff-Ferrari HA, Gordon CM, Hanley DA, et al. Evaluation, treatment, and prevention of vitamin D deficiency: An Endocrine Society clinical practice guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2011;96:1911-30. [PubMed abstract]
    Piloya TW, Bakeera-Kitaka S, Kisitu GP, Idro R, Cusick SE. Vitamin D status and associated factors among HIV-infected children and adolescents on antiretroviral therapy in Kampala, Uganda. PLoS One 2021;16:e0253689. [PubMed abstract]
    Muhihi A, Fawzi WW, Aboud S, Nagu TJ, Ulenga N, et al. Cholecalciferol supplementation does not affect the risk of HIV progression, viral suppression, comorbidities, weight loss, and depression among Tanzanian adults initiating antiretroviral therapy: Secondary outcomes of a randomized trial. J Nutr 2022. [PubMed abstract]
    Akimbekov NS, Ortoski RA, Razzaque MS. Effects of sunlight exposure and vitamin D supplementation on HIV patients. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 2020;200:105664. [PubMed abstract]
    Qurban R, Saeed S, Kanwal W, Junaid K, Rehman A. Potential immune modulatory effect of vitamin D in HIV infection: A review. Clin Nutr ESPEN 2022;47:1-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Sudfeld CR, Mugusi F, Muhihi A, Aboud S, Nagu TJ, et al. Efficacy of vitamin D(3) supplementation for the prevention of pulmonary tuberculosis and mortality in HIV: A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet HIV 2020;7:e463-e71. [PubMed abstract]
    Sudfeld CR, Manji KP, Muhihi A, Duggan CP, Aboud S, et al. Vitamin D3 supplementation during pregnancy and lactation for women living with HIV in Tanzania: A randomized controlled trial. PLoS Med 2022;19:e1003973. [PubMed abstract]
    Galior K, Grebe S, Singh R. Development of vitamin D toxicity from overcorrection of vitamin D deficiency: A review of case reports. Nutrients 2018;10. [PubMed abstract]
    Auguste BL, Avila-Casado C, Bargman JM. Use of vitamin D drops leading to kidney failure in a 54-year-old man. CMAJ 2019;191:E390-e4. [PubMed abstract]
    Vogiatzi MG, Jacobson-Dickman E, DeBoer MD. Vitamin D supplementation and risk of toxicity in pediatrics: A review of current literature. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2014;99:1132-41. [PubMed abstract]
    Robien K, Oppeneer SJ, Kelly JA, Hamilton-Reeves JM. Drug-vitamin D interactions: A systematic review of the literature. Nutr Clin Pract 2013;28:194-208. [PubMed abstract]
    Buckley LM, Leib ES, Cartularo KS, Vacek PM, Cooper SM. Calcium and vitamin D3 supplementation prevents bone loss in the spine secondary to low-dose corticosteroids in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Ann Intern Med 1996;125:961-8. [PubMed abstract]
    James PT, Ali Z, Armitage AE, Bonell A, Cerami C, et al. The role of nutrition in COVID-19 susceptibility and severity of disease: A systematic review. J Nutr 2021;151:1854-78. [PubMed abstract]
    Fiorino S, Gallo C, Zippi M, Sabbatani S, Manfredi R, et al. Cytokine storm in aged people with CoV-2: Possible role of vitamins as therapy or preventive strategy. Aging Clin Exp Res 2020;32:2115-31. [PubMed abstract]
    Meydani SN, Barklund MP, Liu S, Meydani M, Miller RA, et al. Vitamin E supplementation enhances cell-mediated immunity in healthy elderly subjects. Am J Clin Nutr 1990;52:557-63. [PubMed abstract]
    Meydani SN, Meydani M, Blumberg JB, Leka LS, Siber G, et al. Vitamin E supplementation and in vivo immune response in healthy elderly subjects. A randomized controlled trial. JAMA 1997;277:1380-6. [PubMed abstract]
    De la Fuente M, Hernanz A, Guayerbas N, Victor VM, Arnalich F. Vitamin E ingestion improves several immune functions in elderly men and women. Free Radic Res 2008;42:272-80. [PubMed abstract]
    Meydani SN, Han SN, Hamer DH. Vitamin E and respiratory infection in the elderly. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2004;1031:214-22. [PubMed abstract]
    Neupane B, Walter SD, Krueger P, Marrie T, Loeb M. Predictors of inhospital mortality and re-hospitalization in older adults with community-acquired pneumonia: A prospective cohort study. BMC Geriatr 2010;10:22. [PubMed abstract]
    Mahalanabis D, Basak M, Paul D, Gupta S, Shaikh S, et al. Antioxidant vitamins E and C as adjunct therapy of severe acute lower-respiratory infection in infants and young children: A randomized controlled trial. Eur J Clin Nutr 2006;60:673-80. [PubMed abstract]
    Graat JM, Schouten EG, Kok FJ. Effect of daily vitamin E and multivitamin-mineral supplementation on acute respiratory tract infections in elderly persons: A randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2002;288:715-21. [PubMed abstract]
    Meydani SN, Leka LS, Fine BC, Dallal GE, Keusch GT, et al. Vitamin E and respiratory tract infections in elderly nursing home residents: A randomized controlled trial. Jama 2004;292:828-36. [PubMed abstract]
    Hemilä H, Virtamo J, Albanes D, Kaprio J. Vitamin E and beta-carotene supplementation and hospital-treated pneumonia incidence in male smokers. Chest 2004;125:557-65. [PubMed abstract]
    Hemilä H. Vitamin E administration may decrease the incidence of pneumonia in elderly males. Clin Interv Aging 2016;11:1379-85. [PubMed abstract]
    Doyle C, Kushi LH, Byers T, Courneya KS, Demark-Wahnefried W, et al. Nutrition and physical activity during and after cancer treatment: An American Cancer Society guide for informed choices. CA Cancer J Clin 2006;56:323-53. [PubMed abstract]
    Natural Medicines Comprehensive Database. Vitamin E. 2021.
    Filippini T, Fairweather-Tait S, Vinceti M. Selenium and immune function: A systematic review and meta-analysis of experimental human studies. Am J Clin Nutr 2023;117:93-110. [PubMed abstract]
    Bae M, Kim H. Mini-review on the roles of vitamin C, vitamin D, and selenium in the immune system against COVID-19. Molecules 2020;25. [PubMed abstract]
    Akhtar S, Das JK, Ismail T, Wahid M, Saeed W, et al. Nutritional perspectives for the prevention and mitigation of COVID-19. Nutr Rev 2021;79:289-300. [PubMed abstract]
    Bermano G, Méplan C, Mercer DK, Hesketh JE. Selenium and viral infection: Are there lessons for COVID-19? Br J Nutr 2021;125:618-27. [PubMed abstract]
    Zhang J, Saad R, Taylor EW, Rayman MP. Selenium and selenoproteins in viral infection with potential relevance to COVID-19. Redox Biol 2020;37:101715. [PubMed abstract]
    Allingstrup M, Afshari A. Selenium supplementation for critically ill adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2015;2015:Cd003703. [PubMed abstract]
    Martinez SS, Huang Y, Acuna L, Laverde E, Trujillo D, et al. Role of selenium in viral infections with a major focus on SARS-CoV-2. Int J Mol Sci 2021;23. [PubMed abstract]
    Guillin OM, Vindry C, Ohlmann T, Chavatte L. Selenium, selenoproteins and viral infection. Nutrients 2019;11. [PubMed abstract]
    Li S, Tang T, Guo P, Zou Q, Ao X, et al. A meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials: Efficacy of selenium treatment for sepsis. Medicine (Baltimore) 2019;98:e14733. [PubMed abstract]
    Mahmoodpoor A, Hamishehkar H, Sanaie S, Behruzizad N, Iranpour A, et al. Antioxidant reserve of the lungs and ventilator-associated pneumonia: A clinical trial of high dose selenium in critically ill patients. J Crit Care 2018;44:357-62. [PubMed abstract]
    Kafai MR, Ganji V. Sex, age, geographical location, smoking, and alcohol consumption influence serum selenium concentrations in the USA: Third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, 1988-1994. J Trace Elem Med Biol 2003;17:13-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Zhang J, Taylor EW, Bennett K, Saad R, Rayman MP. Association between regional selenium status and reported outcome of COVID-19 cases in China. Am J Clin Nutr 2020;111:1297-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Bunupuradah T, Ubolyam S, Hansudewechakul R, Kosalaraksa P, Ngampiyaskul C, et al. Correlation of selenium and zinc levels to antiretroviral treatment outcomes in Thai HIV-infected children without severe HIV symptoms. European Journal of Clinical Nutrition 2012;66:900-5. [PubMed abstract]
    Kamwesiga J, Mutabazi V, Kayumba J, Tayari JC, Uwimbabazi JC, et al. Effect of selenium supplementation on CD4+ T-cell recovery, viral suppression and morbidity of HIV-infected patients in Rwanda: A randomized controlled trial. AIDS 2015;29:1045-52. [PubMed abstract]
    Hadadi A, Ostovar A, Edalat Noor B, Rasoolinejad M, Haji Abdolbaghi M, et al. The effect of selenium and zinc on CD4(+) count and opportunistic infections in HIV/AIDS patients: A randomized double blind trial. Acta Clin Belg 2020;75:170-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Okunade KS, Olowoselu OF, Osanyin GE, John-Olabode S, Akanmu SA, et al. Selenium deficiency and pregnancy outcome in pregnant women with HIV in Lagos, Nigeria. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 2018;142:207-13. [PubMed abstract]
    Okunade KS, Olowoselu OF, John-Olabode S, Hassan BO, Akinsola OJ, et al. Effects of selenium supplementation on pregnancy outcomes and disease progression in HIV-infected pregnant women in Lagos: A randomized controlled trial. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 2021;153:533-41. [PubMed abstract]
    Vernie LN, de Goeij JJ, Zegers C, de Vries M, Baldew GS, et al. Cisplatin-induced changes of selenium levels and glutathione peroxidase activities in blood of testis tumor patients. Cancer Lett 1988;40:83-91. [PubMed abstract]
    Sieja K, Talerczyk M. Selenium as an element in the treatment of ovarian cancer in women receiving chemotherapy. Gynecol Oncol 2004;93:320-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Dennert G, Horneber M. Selenium for alleviating the side effects of chemotherapy, radiotherapy and surgery in cancer patients. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2006;2006:Cd005037. [PubMed abstract]
    Prasad AS. Zinc: An overview. Nutrition 1995;11:93-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Lazzerini M. Oral zinc provision in acute diarrhea. Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care 2016;19:239-43. [PubMed abstract]
    Wessels I, Maywald M, Rink L. Zinc as a gatekeeper of immune function. Nutrients 2017;9. [PubMed abstract]
    Wessels I, Fischer HJ, Rink L. Dietary and physiological effects of zinc on the immune system. Annu Rev Nutr 2021;41:133-75. [PubMed abstract]
    Wessels I, Rolles B, Rink L. The potential impact of zinc supplementation on COVID-19 pathogenesis. Front Immunol 2020;11:1712. [PubMed abstract]
    Read SA, Obeid S, Ahlenstiel C, Ahlenstiel G. The role of zinc in antiviral immunity. Adv Nutr 2019;10:696-710. [PubMed abstract]
    Prasad AS. Lessons learned from experimental human model of zinc deficiency. J Immunol Res 2020;2020:9207279. [PubMed abstract]
    Wintergerst ES, Maggini S, Hornig DH. Contribution of selected vitamins and trace elements to immune function. Ann Nutr Metab 2007;51:301-23. [PubMed abstract]
    Meydani SN, Barnett JB, Dallal GE, Fine BC, Jacques PF, et al. Serum zinc and pneumonia in nursing home elderly. Am J Clin Nutr 2007;86:1167-73. [PubMed abstract]
    Barnett JB, Hamer DH, Meydani SN. Low zinc status: A new risk factor for pneumonia in the elderly? Nutr Rev 2010;68:30-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Barnett JB, Dao MC, Hamer DH, Kandel R, Brandeis G, et al. Effect of zinc supplementation on serum zinc concentration and T cell proliferation in nursing home elderly: A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Am J Clin Nutr 2016;103:942-51. [PubMed abstract]
    Reider CA, Chung RY, Devarshi PP, Grant RW, Hazels Mitmesser S. Inadequacy of immune health nutrients: Intakes in US adults, the 2005-2016 NHANES. Nutrients 2020;12. [PubMed abstract]
    Hulisz D. Efficacy of zinc against common cold viruses: An overview. J Am Pharm Assoc (2003) 2004;44:594-603. [PubMed abstract]
    Caruso TJ, Prober CG, Gwaltney JM, Jr. Treatment of naturally acquired common colds with zinc: A structured review. Clin Infect Dis 2007;45:569-74. [PubMed abstract]
    Hunter J, Arentz S, Goldenberg J, Yang G, Beardsley J, et al. Zinc for the prevention or treatment of acute viral respiratory tract infections in adults: A rapid systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. BMJ Open 2021;11:e047474. [PubMed abstract]
    Hemilä H. Zinc lozenges and the common cold: A meta-analysis comparing zinc acetate and zinc gluconate, and the role of zinc dosage. JRSM Open 2017;8:2054270417694291. [PubMed abstract]
    Hemilä H. Zinc lozenges may shorten the duration of colds: A systematic review. Open Respir Med J 2011;5:51-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Science M, Johnstone J, Roth DE, Guyatt G, Loeb M. Zinc for the treatment of the common cold: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. CMAJ 2012;184:E551-61. [PubMed abstract]
    Prasad AS, Beck FW, Bao B, Snell D, Fitzgerald JT. Duration and severity of symptoms and levels of plasma interleukin-1 receptor antagonist, soluble tumor necrosis factor receptor, and adhesion molecules in patients with common cold treated with zinc acetate. J Infect Dis 2008;197:795-802. [PubMed abstract]
    Turner RB, Cetnarowski WE. Effect of treatment with zinc gluconate or zinc acetate on experimental and natural colds. Clin Infect Dis 2000;31:1202-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Wang MX, Win SS, Pang J. Zinc supplementation reduces common cold duration among healthy adults: A systematic review of randomized controlled trials with micronutrients supplementation. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2020;103:86-99. [PubMed abstract]
    Lassi ZS, Moin A, Bhutta ZA. Zinc supplementation for the prevention of pneumonia in children aged 2 months to 59 months. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2016;12:Cd005978. [PubMed abstract]
    Saleh NY, Abo El Fotoh WMM. Low serum zinc level: The relationship with severe pneumonia and survival in critically ill children. Int J Clin Pract 2018;72:e13211. [PubMed abstract]
    Sakulchit T, Goldman RD. Zinc supplementation for pediatric pneumonia. Can Fam Physician 2017;63:763-5. [PubMed abstract]
    Black RE. Zinc deficiency, infectious disease and mortality in the developing world. J Nutr 2003;133:1485s-9s. [PubMed abstract]
    Walker CLF, Rudan I, Liu L, Nair H, Theodoratou E, et al. Global burden of childhood pneumonia and diarrhoea. Lancet 2013;381:1405-16. [PubMed abstract]
    Grant CC, Wall CR, Gibbons MJ, Morton SM, Santosham M, et al. Child nutrition and lower respiratory tract disease burden in New Zealand: A global context for a national perspective. J Paediatr Child Health 2011;47(8): 497-504. [PubMed abstract]
    Brown N, Kukka AJ, Mårtensson A. Efficacy of zinc as adjunctive pneumonia treatment in children aged 2 to 60 months in low-income and middle-income countries: A systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ Paediatr Open 2020;4:e000662. [PubMed abstract]
    Wang L, Song Y. Efficacy of zinc given as an adjunct to the treatment of severe pneumonia: A meta-analysis of randomized, double-blind and placebo-controlled trials. Clin Respir J 2018;12:857-64. [PubMed abstract]
    World Health Organization, Fund UNCs. Clinical Management of Acute Diarrhoea. 2004.
    Lazzerini M, Wanzira H. Oral zinc for treating diarrhoea in children. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2016;12:Cd005436. [PubMed abstract]
    Florez ID, Veroniki AA, Al Khalifah R, Yepes-Nuñez JJ, Sierra JM, et al. Comparative effectiveness and safety of interventions for acute diarrhea and gastroenteritis in children: A systematic review and network meta-analysis. PLoS One 2018;13:e0207701. [PubMed abstract]
    King JC, Cousins RJ. Zinc. In: Ross AC CB, Cousins RJ, Tucker KL, Ziegler TR, ed. Modern Nutrition in Health and Disease. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2014:189-205.
    Baum MK, Lai S, Sales S, Page JB, Campa A. Randomized, controlled clinical trial of zinc supplementation to prevent immunological failure in HIV-infected adults. Clin Infect Dis 2010;50:1653-60. [PubMed abstract]
    Fawzi WW, Villamor E, Msamanga GI, Antelman G, Aboud S, et al. Trial of zinc supplements in relation to pregnancy outcomes, hematologic indicators, and T cell counts among HIV-1-infected women in Tanzania. Am J Clin Nutr 2005;81:161-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Villamor E, Aboud S, Koulinska IN, Kupka R, Urassa W, et al. Zinc supplementation to HIV-1-infected pregnant women: Effects on maternal anthropometry, viral load, and early mother-to-child transmission. Eur J Clin Nutr 2006;60:862-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Hooper PL, Visconti L, Garry PJ, Johnson GE. Zinc lowers high-density lipoprotein-cholesterol levels. JAMA 1980;244:1960-1. [PubMed abstract]
    Penttilä O, Hurme H, Neuvonen PJ. Effect of zinc sulphate on the absorption of tetracycline and doxycycline in man. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 1975;9:131-4. [PubMed abstract]
    Brewer GJ, Yuzbasiyan-Gurkan V, Johnson V, Dick RD, Wang Y. Treatment of Wilson's disease with zinc: XI. Interaction with other anticopper agents. J Am Coll Nutr 1993;12:26-30. [PubMed abstract]
    Wester PO. Urinary zinc excretion during treatment with different diuretics. Acta Med Scand 1980;208:209-12. [PubMed abstract]
    Lomaestro BM, Bailie GR. Absorption interactions with fluoroquinolones. 1995 update. Drug Saf 1995;12:314-33. [PubMed abstract]
    Cáceres DD, Hancke JL, Burgos RA, Sandberg F, Wikman GK. Use of visual analogue scale measurements (VAS) to asses the effectiveness of standardized Andrographis paniculata extract SHA-10 in reducing the symptoms of common cold. A randomized double blind-placebo study. Phytomedicine 1999;6:217-23. [PubMed abstract]
    Akbar S. Andrographis paniculata: A review of pharmacological activities and clinical effects. Altern Med Rev 2011;16:66-77. [PubMed abstract]
    Hu XY, Wu RH, Logue M, Blondel C, Lai LYW, et al. Andrographis paniculata (Chuān Xīn Lián) for symptomatic relief of acute respiratory tract infections in adults and children: A systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS One 2017;12:e0181780. [PubMed abstract]
    Coon JT, Ernst E. Andrographis paniculata in the treatment of upper respiratory tract infections: A systematic review of safety and efficacy. Planta Med 2004;70:293-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Kligler B, Ulbricht C, Basch E, Kirkwood CD, Abrams TR, et al. Andrographis paniculata for the treatment of upper respiratory infection: A systematic review by the natural standard research collaboration. Explore (NY) 2006;2:25-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Puri A, Saxena R, Saxena RP, Saxena KC, Srivastava V, et al. Immunostimulant agents from Andrographis paniculata. J Nat Prod 1993;56:995-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Banerjee A, Czinn SJ, Reiter RJ, Blanchard TG. Crosstalk between endoplasmic reticulum stress and anti-viral activities: A novel therapeutic target for COVID-19. Life Sci 2020;255:117842. [PubMed abstract]
    Enmozhi SK, Raja K, Sebastine I, Joseph J. Andrographolide as a potential inhibitor of SARS-CoV-2 main protease: An in silico approach. J Biomol Struct Dyn 2020:1-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Murugan NA, Pandian CJ, Jeyakanthan J. Computational investigation on Andrographis paniculata phytochemicals to evaluate their potency against SARS-CoV-2 in comparison to known antiviral compounds in drug trials. J Biomol Struct Dyn 2020:1-12. [PubMed abstract]
    Silveira D, Prieto-Garcia JM, Boylan F, Estrada O, Fonseca-Bazzo YM, et al. COVID-19: Is there evidence for the use of herbal medicines as adjuvant symptomatic therapy? Front Pharmacol 2020;11:581840. [PubMed abstract]
    Melchior J, Palm S, Wikman G. Controlled clinical study of standardized Andrographis paniculata extract in common cold - A pilot trial. Phytomedicine 1997;3:315-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Saxena RC, Singh R, Kumar P, Yadav SC, Negi MP, et al. A randomized double blind placebo controlled clinical evaluation of extract of Andrographis paniculata (KalmCold) in patients with uncomplicated upper respiratory tract infection. Phytomedicine 2010;17:178-85. [PubMed abstract]
    Wagner L, Cramer H, Klose P, Lauche R, Gass F, et al. Herbal medicine for cough: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Forsch Komplementmed 2015;22:359-68. [PubMed abstract]
    Poolsup N, Suthisisang C, Prathanturarug S, Asawamekin A, Chanchareon U. Andrographis paniculata in the symptomatic treatment of uncomplicated upper respiratory tract infection: Systematic review of randomized controlled trials. J Clin Pharm Ther 2004;29:37-45. [PubMed abstract]
    Natural Medicines Comprehensive Database. Andrographis. 2022.
    Amroyan E, Gabrielian E, Panossian A, Wikman G, Wagner H. Inhibitory effect of andrographolide from Andrographis paniculata on PAF-induced platelet aggregation. Phytomedicine 1999;6:27-31. [PubMed abstract]
    Zhang CY, Tan BK. Mechanisms of cardiovascular activity of Andrographis paniculata in the anaesthetized rat. J Ethnopharmacol 1997;56:97-101. [PubMed abstract]
    Sharifi-Rad M, Mnayer D, Morais-Braga MFB, Carneiro JNP, Bezerra CF, et al. Echinacea plants as antioxidant and antibacterial agents: From traditional medicine to biotechnological applications. Phytother Res 2018;32:1653-63. [PubMed abstract]
    Gurley BJ, Fifer EK, Gardner Z. Pharmacokinetic herb-drug interactions (part 2): Drug interactions involving popular botanical dietary supplements and their clinical relevance. Planta Med 2012;78:1490-514. [PubMed abstract]
    LiverTox. Echinacea. In: LiverTox: Clinical and Research Information on Drug-Induced Liver Injury. Bethesda (MD): National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases; 2012. [PubMed abstract]
    Jawad M, Schoop R, Suter A, Klein P, Eccles R. Safety and efficacy profile of Echinacea purpurea to prevent common cold episodes: A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med 2012;2012:841315. [PubMed abstract]
    Barrett B, Brown R, Rakel D, Mundt M, Bone K, et al. Echinacea for treating the common cold: A randomized trial. Ann Intern Med 2010;153:769-77. [PubMed abstract]
    David S, Cunningham R. Echinacea for the prevention and treatment of upper respiratory tract infections: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Complement Ther Med 2019;44:18-26. [PubMed abstract]
    Karsch-Völk M, Barrett B, Kiefer D, Bauer R, Ardjomand-Woelkart K, et al. Echinacea for preventing and treating the common cold. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2014;2:Cd000530. [PubMed abstract]
    Rauš K, Pleschka S, Klein P, Schoop R, Fisher P. Effect of an echinacea-based hot drink versus oseltamivir in influenza treatment: A randomized, double-blind, double-dummy, multicenter, noninferiority clinical trial. Curr Ther Res Clin Exp 2015;77:66-72. [PubMed abstract]
    Holst L, Havnen GC, Nordeng H. Echinacea and elderberry-Should they be used against upper respiratory tract infections during pregnancy? Front Pharmacol 2014;5:31. [PubMed abstract]
    Penzak SR, Robertson SM, Hunt JD, Chairez C, Malati CY, et al. Echinacea purpurea significantly induces cytochrome P450 3A activity but does not alter lopinavir-ritonavir exposure in healthy subjects. Pharmacotherapy 2010;30:797-805. [PubMed abstract]
    Natural Medicines Comprehensive Database. Echinacea. 2021.
    Gafner S, Borchardt T, Bush M, Sudberg S, Feuillere NG, et al. Tales from the elder: Adulteration issues of elder berry. HerbalEGram 2021.
    Porter RS, Bode RF. A review of the antiviral properties of black elder (Sambucus nigra L.) products. Phytother Res 2017;31:533-54. [PubMed abstract]
    Hawkins J, Baker C, Cherry L, Dunne E. Black elderberry (Sambucus nigra) supplementation effectively treats upper respiratory symptoms: A meta-analysis of randomized, controlled clinical trials. Complement Ther Med 2019;42:361-5. [PubMed abstract]
    Harnett J, Oakes K, Carè J, Leach M, Brown D, et al. The effects of Sambucus nigra berry on acute respiratory viral infections: A rapid review of clinical studies. Adv Integr Med 2020. [PubMed abstract]
    Vlachojannis JE, Cameron M, Chrubasik S. A systematic review on the sambuci fructus effect and efficacy profiles. Phytother Res 2010;24:1-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Kinoshita E, Hayashi K, Katayama H, Hayashi T, Obata A. Anti-influenza virus effects of elderberry juice and its fractions. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem 2012;76:1633-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Tiralongo E, Wee SS, Lea RA. Elderberry supplementation reduces cold duration and symptoms in air-travellers: A randomized, double-blind placebo-controlled clinical trial. Nutrients 2016;8:182. [PubMed abstract]
    Macknin M, Wolski K, Negrey J, Mace S. Elderberry extract outpatient influenza treatment for emergency room patients ages 5 and above: A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. J Gen Intern Med 2020. [PubMed abstract]
    Wieland LS, Piechotta V, Feinberg T, Ludeman E, Hutton B, et al. Elderberry for prevention and treatment of viral respiratory illnesses: A systematic review. BMC Complement Med Ther 2021;21:112. [PubMed abstract]
    Adams KK, Baker WL, Sobieraj DM. Myth busters: Dietary supplements and COVID-19. Ann Pharmacother 2020;54:820-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Ulbricht C, Basch E, Cheung L, Goldberg H, Hammerness P, et al. An evidence-based systematic review of elderberry and elderflower (Sambucus nigra) by the Natural Standard Research Collaboration. J Diet Suppl 2014;11:80-120. [PubMed abstract]
    Crawford C, Avula B, Lindsey AT, Walter A, Katragunta K, et al. Analysis of select dietary supplement products marketed to support or boost the immune system. JAMA Netw Open 2022;5:e2226040. [PubMed abstract]
    Barak V, Halperin T, Kalickman I. The effect of Sambucol, a black elderberry-based, natural product, on the production of human cytokines: I. Inflammatory cytokines. Eur Cytokine Netw 2001;12:290-6. [PubMed abstract]
    National Institutes of Health. Dietary Supplement Label Database. 2022.
    Lissiman E, Bhasale AL, Cohen M. Garlic for the common cold. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2014;2014:Cd006206. [PubMed abstract]
    Josling P. Preventing the common cold with a garlic supplement: A double-blind, placebo-controlled survey. Adv Ther 2001;18:189-93. [PubMed abstract]
    Elosta A, Ghous T, Ahmed N. Natural products as anti-glycation agents: Possible therapeutic potential for diabetic complications. Curr Diabetes Rev 2012;8:92-108. [PubMed abstract]
    Percival SS. Aged garlic extract modifies human immunity. J Nutr 2016;146:433s-6s. [PubMed abstract]
    Xu C, Mathews AE, Rodrigues C, Eudy BJ, Rowe CA, et al. Aged garlic extract supplementation modifies inflammation and immunity of adults with obesity: A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial. Clin Nutr ESPEN 2018;24:148-55. [PubMed abstract]
    Nantz MP, Rowe CA, Muller CE, Creasy RA, Stanilka JM, et al. Supplementation with aged garlic extract improves both NK and γδ-T cell function and reduces the severity of cold and flu symptoms: A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled nutrition intervention. Clin Nutr 2012;31:337-44. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. CFR - Code of Federal Regulations Title 21, Part 184, Subpart B, Listing of Specific Substances Affirmed as GRAS, Section 184.1317 Garlic and its derivatives 2022.
    Woodbury A, Sniecinski R. Garlic-induced surgical bleeding: How much is too much? A A Case Rep 2016;7:266-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Rahman K, Billington D. Dietary supplementation with aged garlic extract inhibits ADP-induced platelet aggregation in humans. J Nutr 2000;130:2662-5. [PubMed abstract]
    Natural Medicines Comprehensive Database. Garlic. 2022.
    Silagy CA, Neil HA. A meta-analysis of the effect of garlic on blood pressure. J Hypertens 1994;12:463-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Ried K, Frank OR, Stocks NP, Fakler P, Sullivan T. Effect of garlic on blood pressure: A systematic review and meta-analysis. BMC Cardiovasc Disord 2008;8:13. [PubMed abstract]
    Mancuso C, Santangelo R. Panax ginseng and Panax quinquefolius: From pharmacology to toxicology. Food Chem Toxicol 2017;107:362-72. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service. PLANTS Database. 2020.
    Antonelli M, Donelli D, Firenzuoli F. Ginseng integrative supplementation for seasonal acute upper respiratory infections: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Complement Ther Med 2020;52:102457. [PubMed abstract]
    Coon JT, Ernst E. Panax ginseng: A systematic review of adverse effects and drug interactions. Drug Saf 2002;25:323-44. [PubMed abstract]
    Lee CS, Lee JH, Oh M, Choi KM, Jeong MR, et al. Preventive effect of Korean red ginseng for acute respiratory illness: A randomized and double-blind clinical trial. J Korean Med Sci 2012;27:1472-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Predy GN, Goel V, Lovlin R, Donner A, Stitt L, et al. Efficacy of an extract of North American ginseng containing poly-furanosyl-pyranosyl-saccharides for preventing upper respiratory tract infections: A randomized controlled trial. CMAJ 2005;173:1043-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Seida JK, Durec T, Kuhle S. North American (Panax quinquefolius) and Asian ginseng (Panax ginseng) preparations for prevention of the common cold in healthy adults: A systematic review. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med 2011;2011:282151. [PubMed abstract]
    Greenspan EM. Ginseng and vaginal bleeding. JAMA 1983;249:2018. [PubMed abstract]
    Hopkins MP, Androff L, Benninghoff AS. Ginseng face cream and unexplained vaginal bleeding. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1988;159:1121-2. [PubMed abstract]
    Punnonen R, Lukola A. Oestrogen-like effect of ginseng. Br Med J 1980;281:1110. [PubMed abstract]
    Palmer BV, Montgomery AC, Monteiro JC. Gin Seng and mastalgia. Br Med J 1978;1:1284. [PubMed abstract]
    Seely D, Dugoua JJ, Perri D, Mills E, Koren G. Safety and efficacy of panax ginseng during pregnancy and lactation. Can J Clin Pharmacol 2008;15:e87-94. [PubMed abstract]
    Natural Medicines Comprehensive Database. Panax Ginseng. 2020.
    Sotaniemi EA, Haapakoski E, Rautio A. Ginseng therapy in non-insulin-dependent diabetic patients. Diabetes Care 1995;18:1373-5. [PubMed abstract]
    Shirakami Y, Shimizu M. Possible mechanisms of green tea and its constituents against cancer. Molecules 2018;23. [PubMed abstract]
    Furushima D, Ide K, Yamada H. Effect of tea catechins on influenza infection and the common cold with a focus on epidemiological/clinical studies. Molecules 2018;23. [PubMed abstract]
    Isemura M. Catechin in human health and disease. Molecules 2019;24. [PubMed abstract]
    Jowko E. Chapter 8: Green Tea Catechins and Sport Performance. In: Lamprecht M, ed. Antioxidants in Sport Nutrition. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press/Taylor & Francis; 2015.
    Koch W, Kukula-Koch W, Głowniak K. Catechin composition and antioxidant activity of black teas in relation to brewing time. J AOAC Int 2017;100:1694-9.
    Rossi RE, Chen J, Caplin ME. The role of diet and supplements in the prevention and progression of COVID-19: Current knowledge and open issues. Prev Nutr Food Sci 2022;27:137-49. [PubMed abstract]
    Matsumoto K, Yamada H, Takuma N, Niino H, Sagesaka YM. Effects of green tea catechins and theanine on preventing influenza infection among healthcare workers: A randomized controlled trial. BMC Complement Altern Med 2011;11:15. [PubMed abstract]
    Umeda M, Tominaga T, Kozuma K, Kitazawa H, Furushima D, et al. Preventive effects of tea and tea catechins against influenza and acute upper respiratory tract infections: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Eur J Nutr 2021;60:4189-202. [PubMed abstract]
    Ozato N, Yamaguchi T, Kusaura T, Kitazawa H, Hibi M, et al. Effect of catechins on upper respiratory tract infections in winter: A randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blinded trial. Nutrients 2022;14. [PubMed abstract]
    Jurgens TM, Whelan AM, Killian L, Doucette S, Kirk S, et al. Green tea for weight loss and weight maintenance in overweight or obese adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2012;12:Cd008650. [PubMed abstract]
    Sarma DN, Barrett ML, Chavez ML, Gardiner P, Ko R, et al. Safety of green tea extracts : A systematic review by the US Pharmacopeia. Drug Saf 2008;31:469-84. [PubMed abstract]
    Younes M, Aggett P, Aguilar F, Crebelli R, Dusemund B, et al. Scientific opinion on the safety of green tea catechins. EFSA J 2018;16:e05239.
    Navarro VJ, Khan I, Björnsson E, Seeff LB, Serrano J, et al. Liver injury from herbal and dietary supplements. Hepatology 2017;65:363-73. [PubMed abstract]
    Oketch-Rabah HA, Roe AL, Rider CV, Bonkovsky HL, Giancaspro GI, et al. United States Pharmacopeia (USP) comprehensive review of the hepatotoxicity of green tea extracts. Toxicol Rep 2020;7:386-402. [PubMed abstract]
    EFSA Panel on Dietetic Products N, Allergies. Scientific Opinion on the safety of caffeine. EFSA Journal 2015;13:4102.
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Spilling the beans: How much caffeine is too much? 2018.
    Torpy JM, Livingston EH. JAMA patient page. Energy drinks. JAMA 2013;309:297. [PubMed abstract]
    The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. ACOG CommitteeOpinion No. 462: Moderate caffeine consumption during pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 2010;116:467-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Gleason JL, Tekola-Ayele F, Sundaram R, Hinkle SN, Vafai Y, et al. Association between maternal caffeine consumption and metabolism and neonatal anthropometry: A secondary analysis of the NICHD fetal growth studies-singletons. JAMA Netw Open 2021;4:e213238. [PubMed abstract]
    Yen M, Ewald MB. Toxicity of weight loss agents. J Med Toxicol 2012;8:145-52. [PubMed abstract]
    Abdelkawy KS, Abdelaziz RM, Abdelmageed AM, Donia AM, El-Khodary NM. Effects of green tea extract on atorvastatin pharmacokinetics in healthy volunteers. Eur J Drug Metab Pharmacokinet 2020;45:351-60. [PubMed abstract]
    Cruzat V, Macedo Rogero M, Noel Keane K, Curi R, Newsholme P. Glutamine: Metabolism and immune function, supplementation and clinical translation. Nutrients 2018;10. [PubMed abstract]
    Lenders CM, Liu S, Wilmore DW, Sampson L, Dougherty LW, et al. Evaluation of a novel food composition database that includes glutamine and other amino acids derived from gene sequencing data. Eur J Clin Nutr 2009;63:1433-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Ma W, Heianza Y, Huang T, Wang T, Sun D, et al. Dietary glutamine, glutamate and mortality: Two large prospective studies in US men and women. Int J Epidemiol 2018;47:311-20. [PubMed abstract]
    Shao A, Hathcock JN. Risk assessment for the amino acids taurine, L-glutamine and L-arginine. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol 2008;50:376-99. [PubMed abstract]
    Watford M. Glutamine and glutamate: Nonessential or essential amino acids? Anim Nutr 2015;1:119-22. [PubMed abstract]
    Institute of Medicine. Food and Nutrition Board. Dietary reference intakes for energy, carbohydrate, fiber, fat, fatty acids, cholesterol, protein, and amino acids (macronutrients). Washington, DC National Academy Press; 2005. [PubMed abstract]
    Wischmeyer PE. Glutamine in burn injury. Nutr Clin Pract 2019;34:681-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Rodas PC, Rooyackers O, Hebert C, Norberg Å, Wernerman J. Glutamine and glutathione at ICU admission in relation to outcome. Clin Sci (Lond) 2012;122:591-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Tao KM, Li XQ, Yang LQ, Yu WF, Lu ZJ, et al. Glutamine supplementation for critically ill adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2014;2014:Cd010050. [PubMed abstract]
    Cavalcante AA, Campelo MW, de Vasconcelos MP, Ferreira CM, Guimarães SB, et al. Enteral nutrition supplemented with L-glutamine in patients with systemic inflammatory response syndrome due to pulmonary infection. Nutrition 2012;28:397-402. [PubMed abstract]
    Griffiths RD, Jones C, Palmer TE. Six-month outcome of critically ill patients given glutamine-supplemented parenteral nutrition. Nutrition 1997;13:295-302. [PubMed abstract]
    Andrews PJ, Avenell A, Noble DW, Campbell MK, Croal BL, et al. Randomised trial of glutamine, selenium, or both, to supplement parenteral nutrition for critically ill patients. BMJ 2011;342:d1542. [PubMed abstract]
    Rozga M, Cheng FW, Moloney L, Handu D. Effects of micronutrients or conditional amino acids on COVID-19-related outcomes: An evidence analysis center scoping review. J Acad Nutr Diet 2021;121:1354-63. [PubMed abstract]
    Ogden HB, Child RB, Fallowfield JL, Delves SK, Westwood CS, et al. Gastrointestinal tolerance of low, medium and high dose acute oral l-glutamine supplementation in healthy adults: A pilot study. Nutrients 2020;12. [PubMed abstract]
    Ward E, Picton S, Reid U, Thomas D, Gardener C, et al. Oral glutamine in paediatric oncology patients: A dose finding study. Eur J Clin Nutr 2003;57:31-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Bauer SR, Kapoor A, Rath M, Thomas SA. What is the role of supplementation with ascorbic acid, zinc, vitamin D, or N-acetylcysteine for prevention or treatment of COVID-19? Cleve Clin J Med 2020. [PubMed abstract]
    Shi Z, Puyo CA. N-acetylcysteine to combat COVID-19: An evidence review. Ther Clin Risk Manag 2020;16:1047-55. [PubMed abstract]
    Calzetta L, Matera MG, Rogliani P, Cazzola M. Multifaceted activity of N-acetyl-l-cysteine in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Expert Rev Respir Med 2018;12:693-708. [PubMed abstract]
    Fraternale A, Paoletti MF, Casabianca A, Oiry J, Clayette P, et al. Antiviral and immunomodulatory properties of new pro-glutathione (GSH) molecules. Curr Med Chem 2006;13:1749-55. [PubMed abstract]
    Arranz L, Fernández C, Rodríguez A, Ribera JM, De la Fuente M. The glutathione precursor N-acetylcysteine improves immune function in postmenopausal women. Free Radic Biol Med 2008;45:1252-62. [PubMed abstract]
    De Flora S, Balansky R, La Maestra S. Rationale for the use of N-acetylcysteine in both prevention and adjuvant therapy of COVID-19. FASEB J 2020;34:13185-93. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. National Drug Code Directory. 2021.
    Ershad M, Naji A, Vearrier D. N Acetylcysteine. In: StatPearls. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing Copyright © 2022, StatPearls Publishing LLC.; 2022.
    Morris D, Khurasany M, Nguyen T, Kim J, Guilford F, et al. Glutathione and infection. Biochim Biophys Acta 2013;1830:3329-49. [PubMed abstract]
    Morris G, Anderson G, Dean O, Berk M, Galecki P, et al. The glutathione system: A new drug target in neuroimmune disorders. Mol Neurobiol 2014;50:1059-84. [PubMed abstract]
    Singh B, Eshaghian E, Chuang J, Covasa M. Do diet and dietary supplements mitigate clinical outcomes in COVID-19? Nutrients 2022;14:1909. [PubMed abstract]
    Fraternale A, Brundu S, Magnani M. Glutathione and glutathione derivatives in immunotherapy. Biol Chem 2017;398:261-75. [PubMed abstract]
    Khanfar A, Al Qaroot B. Could glutathione depletion be the Trojan horse of COVID-19 mortality? Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci 2020;24:12500-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Ghezzi P. Role of glutathione in immunity and inflammation in the lung. Int J Gen Med 2011;4:105-13. [PubMed abstract]
    Morris D, Guerra C, Khurasany M, Guilford F, Saviola B, et al. Glutathione supplementation improves macrophage functions in HIV. J Interferon Cytokine Res 2013;33:270-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Herzenberg LA, De Rosa SC, Dubs JG, Roederer M, Anderson MT, et al. Glutathione deficiency is associated with impaired survival in HIV disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1997;94:1967-72. [PubMed abstract]
    De Rosa SC, Zaretsky MD, Dubs JG, Roederer M, Anderson M, et al. N-acetylcysteine replenishes glutathione in HIV infection. Eur J Clin Invest 2000;30:915-29. [PubMed abstract]
    Breitkreutz R, Pittack N, Nebe CT, Schuster D, Brust J, et al. Improvement of immune functions in HIV infection by sulfur supplementation: Two randomized trials. J Mol Med (Berl) 2000;78:55-62. [PubMed abstract]
    Criner GJ, Bourbeau J, Diekemper RL, Ouellette DR, Goodridge D, et al. Prevention of acute exacerbations of COPD: American College of Chest Physicians and Canadian Thoracic Society guideline. Chest 2015;147:894-942. [PubMed abstract]
    Calverley P, Rogliani P, Papi A. Safety of N-acetylcysteine at high doses in chronic respiratory diseases: A review. Drug Saf 2021;44:273-90. [PubMed abstract]
    Fowdar K, Chen H, He Z, Zhang J, Zhong X, et al. The effect of N-acetylcysteine on exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: A meta-analysis and systematic review. Heart Lung 2017;46:120-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Natural Medicines Comprehensive Database. N-Acetyl Cysteine (NAC). 2021.
    Horowitz JD, Henry CA, Syrjanen ML, Louis WJ, Fish RD, et al. Nitroglycerine/N-acetylcysteine in the management of unstable angina pectoris. Eur Heart J 1988;9 Suppl A:95-100. [PubMed abstract]
    Ardissino D, Merlini PA, Savonitto S, Demicheli G, Zanini P, et al. Effect of transdermal nitroglycerin or N-acetylcysteine, or both, in the long-term treatment of unstable angina pectoris. J Am Coll Cardiol 1997;29:941-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Brenna JT, Salem N, Jr., Sinclair AJ, Cunnane SC. Alpha-linolenic acid supplementation and conversion to n-3 long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids in humans. Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids 2009;80:85-91. [PubMed abstract]
    Jones PJH, Rideout T. Lipids, sterols, and their metabolies. In: Ross AC, Caballero B, Cousins RJ, Tucker KL, Ziegler TF, eds. Modern Nutrition in Health and Disease. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2014.
    Hathaway D, Pandav K, Patel M, Riva-Moscoso A, Singh BM, et al. Omega 3 fatty acids and COVID-19: A comprehensive review. Infect Chemother 2020;52:478-95. [PubMed abstract]
    James M, Proudman S, Cleland L. Fish oil and rheumatoid arthritis: Past, present and future. Proc Nutr Soc 2010;69:316-23. [PubMed abstract]
    Calder PC. n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids, inflammation, and inflammatory diseases. Am J Clin Nutr 2006;83:1505s-19s. [PubMed abstract]
    Fontes JD, Rahman F, Lacey S, Larson MG, Vasan RS, et al. Red blood cell fatty acids and biomarkers of inflammation: A cross-sectional study in a community-based cohort. Atherosclerosis 2015;240:431-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Gutiérrez S, Svahn SL, Johansson ME. Effects of omega-3 fatty acids on immune cells. Int J Mol Sci 2019;20. [PubMed abstract]
    Chanda W, Joseph TP, Guo XF, Wang WD, Liu M, et al. Effectiveness of omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids against microbial pathogens. J Zhejiang Univ Sci B 2018;19:253-62. [PubMed abstract]
    Harris WS, Tintle NL, Imamura F, Qian F, Korat AVA, et al. Blood n-3 fatty acid levels and total and cause-specific mortality from 17 prospective studies. Nat Commun 2021;12:2329. [PubMed abstract]
    McBurney MI, Tintle NL, Harris WS. Lower omega-3 status associated with higher erythrocyte distribution width and neutrophil-lymphocyte ratio in UK Biobank cohort. Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids 2023;192:102567. [PubMed abstract]
    McBurney MI, Tintle NL, Harris WS. The omega-3 index is inversely associated with the neutrophil-lymphocyte ratio in adults'. Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids 2022;177:102397. [PubMed abstract]
    Dushianthan A, Cusack R, Burgess VA, Grocott MP, Calder PC. Immunonutrition for acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2019;1:Cd012041. [PubMed abstract]
    Pontes-Arruda A, Demichele S, Seth A, Singer P. The use of an inflammation-modulating diet in patients with acute lung injury or acute respiratory distress syndrome: A meta-analysis of outcome data. JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr 2008;32:596-605. [PubMed abstract]
    Dee BM, Bruno JJ, Lal LS, Canada TW. Effects of immune-enhancing enteral nutrition on mortality and oxygenation in acute lung injury and acute respiratory distress syndrome: A meta-analysis. Hospital Pharmacy 2011;46:33 - 40.
    Stapleton RD, Martin TR, Weiss NS, Crowley JJ, Gundel SJ, et al. A phase II randomized placebo-controlled trial of omega-3 fatty acids for the treatment of acute lung injury. Crit Care Med 2011;39:1655-62. [PubMed abstract]
    Parish M, Valiyi F, Hamishehkar H, Sanaie S, Asghari Jafarabadi M, et al. The effect of omega-3 fatty acids on ARDS: A randomized double-blind study. Adv Pharm Bull 2014;4:555-61. [PubMed abstract]
    Zhu D, Zhang Y, Li S, Gan L, Feng H, et al. Enteral omega-3 fatty acid supplementation in adult patients with acute respiratory distress syndrome: A systematic review of randomized controlled trials with meta-analysis and trial sequential analysis. Intensive Care Med 2014;40:504-12. [PubMed abstract]
    Li C, Bo L, Liu W, Lu X, Jin F. Enteral immunomodulatory diet (omega-3 fatty acid, γ-linolenic acid and antioxidant supplementation) for acute lung injury and acute respiratory distress syndrome: An updated systematic review and meta-analysis. Nutrients 2015;7:5572-85. [PubMed abstract]
    McClave SA, Taylor BE, Martindale RG, Warren MM, Johnson DR, et al. Guidelines for the provision and assessment of nutrition support therapy in the adult critically ill patient: Society of Critical Care Medicine (SCCM) and American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition (A.S.P.E.N.). JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr 2016;40:159-211. [PubMed abstract]
    Miles EA, Childs CE, Calder PC. Long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids (LCPUFAs) and the developing immune system: A narrative review. Nutrients 2021;13. [PubMed abstract]
    Adjibade M, Davisse-Paturet C, Bernard JY, Adel-Patient K, Divaret-Chauveau A, et al. Enrichment of infant formula with long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids and risk of infection and allergy in the nationwide ELFE birth cohort. Allergy 2022;77:1522-33. [PubMed abstract]
    Pastor N, Soler B, Mitmesser SH, Ferguson P, Lifschitz C. Infants fed docosahexaenoic acid- and arachidonic acid-supplemented formula have decreased incidence of bronchiolitis/bronchitis the first year of life. Clin Pediatr (Phila) 2006;45:850-5. [PubMed abstract]
    Lapillonne A, Pastor N, Zhuang W, Scalabrin DM. Infants fed formula with added long chain polyunsaturated fatty acids have reduced incidence of respiratory illnesses and diarrhea during the first year of life. BMC Pediatr 2014;14:168. [PubMed abstract]
    Birch EE, Khoury JC, Berseth CL, Castañeda YS, Couch JM, et al. The impact of early nutrition on incidence of allergic manifestations and common respiratory illnesses in children. J Pediatr 2010;156:902-6.e1. [PubMed abstract]
    Thienprasert A, Samuhaseneetoo S, Popplestone K, West AL, Miles EA, et al. Fish oil n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids selectively affect plasma cytokines and decrease illness in Thai schoolchildren: A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled intervention trial. J Pediatr 2009;154:391-5. [PubMed abstract]
    Hughes DA, Pinder AC, Piper Z, Johnson IT, Lund EK. Fish oil supplementation inhibits the expression of major histocompatibility complex class II molecules and adhesion molecules on human monocytes. Am J Clin Nutr 1996;63:267-72. [PubMed abstract]
    Mølvig J, Pociot F, Worsaae H, Wogensen LD, Baek L, et al. Dietary supplementation with omega-3-polyunsaturated fatty acids decreases mononuclear cell proliferation and interleukin-1 beta content but not monokine secretion in healthy and insulin-dependent diabetic individuals. Scand J Immunol 1991;34:399-410. [PubMed abstract]
    Virella G, Fourspring K, Hyman B, Haskill-Stroud R, Long L, et al. Immunosuppressive effects of fish oil in normal human volunteers: Correlation with the in vitro effects of eicosapentanoic acid on human lymphocytes. Clin Immunol Immunopathol 1991;61:161-76. [PubMed abstract]
    Kelley DS, Taylor PC, Nelson GJ, Schmidt PC, Ferretti A, et al. Docosahexaenoic acid ingestion inhibits natural killer cell activity and production of inflammatory mediators in young healthy men. Lipids 1999;34:317-24. [PubMed abstract]
    Cooper AL, Gibbons L, Horan MA, Little RA, Rothwell NJ. Effect of dietary fish oil supplementation on fever and cytokine production in human volunteers. Clin Nutr 1993;12:321-8. [PubMed abstract]
    European Food Safety Authority. Scientific opinion on the tolerable upper intake level of eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) and docosapentaenoic acid (DPA). EFSA Journal 2012;10:2815.
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Qualified Health Claims: Letters of Enforcement Discretion. 2019.
    Mazereeuw G, Lanctôt KL, Chau SA, Swardfager W, Herrmann N. Effects of ω-3 fatty acids on cognitive performance: A meta-analysis. Neurobiol Aging 2012;33:1482.e17-29. [PubMed abstract]
    Cabré E, Mañosa M, Gassull MA. Omega-3 fatty acids and inflammatory bowel diseases - A systematic review. Br J Nutr 2012;107 Suppl 2:S240-52. [PubMed abstract]
    Buckley MS, Goff AD, Knapp WE. Fish oil interaction with warfarin. Ann Pharmacother 2004;38:50-2. [PubMed abstract]
    Jeansen S, Witkamp RF, Garthoff JA, van Helvoort A, Calder PC. Fish oil LC-PUFAs do not affect blood coagulation parameters and bleeding manifestations: Analysis of 8 clinical studies with selected patient groups on omega-3-enriched medical nutrition. Clin Nutr 2018;37:948-57. [PubMed abstract]
    Wachira JK, Larson MK, Harris WS. n-3 Fatty acids affect haemostasis but do not increase the risk of bleeding: Clinical observations and mechanistic insights. Br J Nutr 2014;111:1652-62. [PubMed abstract]
    GlaxoSmithKline. LOVAZA® (omega-3 acid ethyl esters) capsules, prescribing information. 2008.
    Appel LJ, Miller ER, 3rd, Seidler AJ, Whelton PK. Does supplementation of diet with 'fish oil' reduce blood pressure? A meta-analysis of controlled clinical trials. Arch Intern Med 1993;153:1429-38. [PubMed abstract]
    Busnach G, Stragliotto E, Minetti E, Perego A, Brando B, et al. Effect of n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids on cyclosporine pharmacokinetics in kidney graft recipients: A randomized placebo-controlled study. J Nephrol 1998;11:87-93. [PubMed abstract]
    Natural Medicines Comprehensive Database. Fish Oil. 2023.
    Hill C, Guarner F, Reid G, Gibson GR, Merenstein DJ, et al. Expert consensus document. The International Scientific Association for Probiotics and Prebiotics consensus statement on the scope and appropriate use of the term probiotic. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol 2014;11:506-14. [PubMed abstract]
    World Gastroenterology Organisation. Probiotics and prebiotics. 2017.
    Lehtoranta L, Pitkäranta A, Korpela R. Probiotics in respiratory virus infections. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 2014;33:1289-302. [PubMed abstract]
    Hao Q, Dong BR, Wu T. Probiotics for preventing acute upper respiratory tract infections. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2015:Cd006895. [PubMed abstract]
    Mohr AE, Basile AJ, Crawford MS, Sweazea KL, Carpenter KC. Probiotic supplementation has a limited effect on circulating immune and inflammatory markers in healthy adults: A systematic review of randomized controlled trials. J Acad Nutr Diet 2020;120:548-64. [PubMed abstract]
    Frei R, Akdis M, O'Mahony L. Prebiotics, probiotics, synbiotics, and the immune system: Experimental data and clinical evidence. Curr Opin Gastroenterol 2015;31:153-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Goldenberg JZ, Yap C, Lytvyn L, Lo CK, Beardsley J, et al. Probiotics for the prevention of Clostridium difficile-associated diarrhea in adults and children. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2017;12:Cd006095. [PubMed abstract]
    Allen SJ, Martinez EG, Gregorio GV, Dans LF. Probiotics for treating acute infectious diarrhoea. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2010;2010:Cd003048. [PubMed abstract]
    Caffarelli C, Cardinale F, Povesi-Dascola C, Dodi I, Mastrorilli V, et al. Use of probiotics in pediatric infectious diseases. Expert Rev Anti Infect Ther 2015;13:1517-35. [PubMed abstract]
    Richie JP, Jr., Nichenametla S, Neidig W, Calcagnotto A, Haley JS, et al. Randomized controlled trial of oral glutathione supplementation on body stores of glutathione. Eur J Nutr 2015;54:251-63. [PubMed abstract]
    Villarruel G, Rubio DM, Lopez F, Cintioni J, Gurevech R, et al. Saccharomyces boulardii in acute childhood diarrhoea: A randomized, placebo-controlled study. Acta Paediatr 2007;96:538-41. [PubMed abstract]
    Szajewska H, Skórka A, Ruszczyński M, Gieruszczak-Białek D. Meta-analysis: Lactobacillus GG for treating acute gastroenteritis in children--updated analysis of randomised controlled trials. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2013;38:467-76. [PubMed abstract]
    Feizizadeh S, Salehi-Abargouei A, Akbari V. Efficacy and safety of Saccharomyces boulardii for acute diarrhea. Pediatrics 2014;134:e176-91. [PubMed abstract]
    Szajewska H, Guarino A, Hojsak I, Indrio F, Kolacek S, et al. Use of probiotics for management of acute gastroenteritis: A position paper by the ESPGHAN Working Group for Probiotics and Prebiotics. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr 2014;58:531-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Freedman SB, Williamson-Urquhart S, Farion KJ, Gouin S, Willan AR, et al. Multicenter trial of a combination probiotic for children with gastroenteritis. N Engl J Med 2018;379:2015-26. [PubMed abstract]
    Schnadower D, Tarr PI, Casper TC, Gorelick MH, Dean JM, et al. Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG versus placebo for acute gastroenteritis in children. N Engl J Med 2018;379:2002-14. [PubMed abstract]
    Collinson S, Deans A, Padua-Zamora A, Gregorio GV, Li C, et al. Probiotics for treating acute infectious diarrhoea. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2020;12:Cd003048. [PubMed abstract]
    Szajewska H, Guarino A, Hojsak I, Indrio F, Kolacek S, et al. Use of probiotics for the management of acute gastroenteritis in children: An update. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr 2020;71:261-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Leyer GJ, Li S, Mubasher ME, Reifer C, Ouwehand AC. Probiotic effects on cold and influenza-like symptom incidence and duration in children. Pediatrics 2009;124:e172-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Ahrén IL, Hillman M, Nordström EA, Larsson N, Niskanen TM. Fewer community-acquired colds with daily consumption of Lactiplantibacillus plantarum HEAL9 and Lacticaseibacillus paracasei 8700:2. A randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trial. J Nutr 2021;151:214-22. [PubMed abstract]
    Coleman JL, Hatch-McChesney A, Small SD, Allen JT, Sullo E, et al. Orally ingested probiotics, prebiotics, and synbiotics as countermeasures for respiratory tract infections in non-elderly adults: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Advances in Nutrition 2022. [PubMed abstract]
    King S, Glanville J, Sanders ME, Fitzgerald A, Varley D. Effectiveness of probiotics on the duration of illness in healthy children and adults who develop common acute respiratory infectious conditions: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Br J Nutr 2014;112:41-54. [PubMed abstract]
    Liu S, Hu P, Du X, Zhou T, Pei X. Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG supplementation for preventing respiratory infections in children: A meta-analysis of randomized, placebo-controlled trials. Indian Pediatr 2013;50:377-81. [PubMed abstract]
    Laursen RP, Hojsak I. Probiotics for respiratory tract infections in children attending day care centers- A systematic review. Eur J Pediatr 2018;177:979-94. [PubMed abstract]
    Wang Y, Li X, Ge T, Xiao Y, Liao Y, et al. Probiotics for prevention and treatment of respiratory tract infections in children: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Medicine (Baltimore) 2016;95:e4509. [PubMed abstract]
    Adjibade M, Davisse-Paturet C, Divaret-Chauveau A, Adel-Patient K, Raherison C, et al. Enrichment of formula in probiotics or prebiotics and risk of infection and allergic diseases up to age 5.5 years in the nationwide ELFE cohort. J Nutr 2022. [PubMed abstract]
    Turner RB, Woodfolk JA, Borish L, Steinke JW, Patrie JT, et al. Effect of probiotic on innate inflammatory response and viral shedding in experimental rhinovirus infection - A randomised controlled trial. Benef Microbes 2017;8:207-15. [PubMed abstract]
    Morrow LE, Kollef MH, Casale TB. Probiotic prophylaxis of ventilator-associated pneumonia: A blinded, randomized, controlled trial. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2010;182:1058-64. [PubMed abstract]
    Johnstone J, Meade M, Lauzier F, Marshall J, Duan E, et al. Effect of probiotics on incident ventilator-associated pneumonia in critically ill patients: A randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2021;326:1024-33. [PubMed abstract]
    Cheema HA, Shahid A, Ayyan M, Mustafa B, Zahid A, et al. Probiotics for the prevention of ventilator-associated pneumonia: An updated systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. Nutrients 2022;14. [PubMed abstract]
    Bo L, Li J, Tao T, Bai Y, Ye X, et al. Probiotics for preventing ventilator-associated pneumonia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2014;10:Cd009066. [PubMed abstract]
    Rozga M, Cheng FW, Handu D. Effects of Probiotics in conditions or infections similar to COVID-19 on health outcomes: An evidence analysis center scoping review. J Acad Nutr Diet 2020. [PubMed abstract]
    Siempos, II, Ntaidou TK, Falagas ME. Impact of the administration of probiotics on the incidence of ventilator-associated pneumonia: A meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Crit Care Med 2010;38:954-62. [PubMed abstract]
    Bailey JL, Yeung SY. Probiotics for disease prevention: A focus on ventilator-associated pneumonia. Ann Pharmacother 2011;45:1425-32. [PubMed abstract]
    Fan QL, Yu XM, Liu QX, Yang W, Chang Q, et al. Synbiotics for prevention of ventilator-associated pneumonia: A probiotics strain-specific network meta-analysis. J Int Med Res 2019;47:5349-74. [PubMed abstract]
    Didari T, Solki S, Mozaffari S, Nikfar S, Abdollahi M. A systematic review of the safety of probiotics. Expert Opin Drug Saf 2014;13:227-39. [PubMed abstract]
    Borriello SP, Hammes WP, Holzapfel W, Marteau P, Schrezenmeir J, et al. Safety of probiotics that contain lactobacilli or bifidobacteria. Clin Infect Dis 2003;36:775-80. [PubMed abstract]
    Lewis SJ, Freedman AR. Review article: The use of biotherapeutic agents in the prevention and treatment of gastrointestinal disease. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 1998;12:807-22. [PubMed abstract]
    Natural Medicines Comprehensive Database. Lactobacillus. 2021.

Disclaimer

This fact sheet by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Office of Dietary Supplements (ODS) provides information that should not take the place of medical advice. We encourage you to talk to your health care providers (doctor, registered dietitian, pharmacist, etc.) about your interest in, questions about, or use of dietary supplements and what may be best for your overall health. Any mention in this publication of a specific brand name is not an endorsement of the product.

Updated: March 10, 2025


 Iodine: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals (original version)
Iodine: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals
Table of Contents

    Introduction
    Recommended Intakes
    Sources of Iodine
    Iodine Intakes and Status
    Iodine Deficiency
    Groups at Risk of Iodine Inadequacy
    Iodine and Health
    Health Risks from Excessive Iodine
    Interactions with Medications
    Iodine and Healthful Diets
    References
    Disclaimer

Introduction

Iodine is a trace element that is naturally present in some foods, is added to some types of salt, and is available as a dietary supplement. Iodine is an essential component of the thyroid hormones thyroxine (T4) and triiodothyronine (T3). Thyroid hormones regulate many important biochemical reactions, including protein synthesis and enzymatic activity, and are critical determinants of metabolic activity [1,2]. They are also required for proper skeletal and central nervous system development in fetuses and infants [1].

Thyroid function is primarily regulated by thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), also known as thyrotropin. It is secreted by the pituitary gland to control thyroid hormone production and secretion, thereby protecting the body from hypothyroidism and hyperthyroidism [1]. TSH secretion increases thyroidal uptake of iodine and stimulates the synthesis and release of T3 and T4. In the absence of sufficient iodine, TSH levels remain elevated, leading to goiter, an enlargement of the thyroid gland that reflects the body’s attempt to trap more iodine from the circulation and produce thyroid hormones. Iodine may have other physiological functions in the body as well. For example, it appears to play a role in immune response and might have a beneficial effect on mammary dysplasia and fibrocystic breast disease [2].

The earth’s soils contain varying amounts of iodine, which in turn affects the iodine content of crops. In some regions of the world, iodine-deficient soils are common, increasing the risk of iodine deficiency among people who consume foods primarily from those areas. Salt iodization programs, which many countries have implemented, have dramatically reduced the prevalence of iodine deficiency worldwide [2,3].

Iodine in food and iodized salt is present in several chemical forms including sodium and potassium salts, inorganic iodine (I2), iodate, and iodide, the reduced form of iodine [4]. Iodine rarely occurs as the element but rather as a salt; for this reason, it is referred to as iodide and not iodine. Iodide is quickly and almost completely absorbed in the stomach and duodenum. Iodate is reduced in the gastrointestinal tract and absorbed as iodide [2,5]. When iodide enters the circulation, the thyroid gland concentrates it in appropriate amounts for thyroid hormone synthesis and most of the remaining amount is excreted in the urine [2]. The iodine-replete healthy adult has about 15–20 mg of iodine, 70%–80% of which is contained in the thyroid [6].

Median urinary iodine concentrations of 100–199 mcg/L in children and adults, 150–249 mcg/L in pregnant women and >100 mcg/L in lactating women indicate iodine intakes are adequate [3]. Values lower than 100 mcg/L in children and nonpregnant adults indicate insufficient iodine intake, although iodine deficiency is not classified as severe until urinary iodine levels are lower than 20 mcg/L.
Recommended Intakes

Intake recommendations for iodine and other nutrients are provided in the Dietary Reference Intakes (DRIs) developed by the Food and Nutrition Board (FNB) at the Institute of Medicine of the National Academies (formerly National Academy of Sciences) [2]. DRI is the general term for a set of reference values used for planning and assessing nutrient intakes of healthy people. These values, which vary by age and gender [2], include the following:

    Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA): Average daily level of intake sufficient to meet the nutrient requirements of nearly all (97%–98%) healthy individuals; often used to plan nutritionally adequate diets for individuals
    Adequate Intake (AI): Intake at this level is assumed to ensure nutritional adequacy; established when evidence is insufficient to develop an RDA
    Estimated Average Requirement (EAR): Average daily level of intake estimated to meet the requirements of 50% of healthy individuals; usually used to assess the nutrient intakes of groups of people and to plan nutritionally adequate diets for them; can also be used to assess the nutrient intakes of individuals
    Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL): Maximum daily intake unlikely to cause adverse health effects

Table 1 lists the current RDAs for iodine [2]. For infants from birth to 12 months, the FNB established an AI for iodine that is equivalent to the mean intake of iodine in healthy, breastfed infants in the United States.
Table 1: Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDAs) for Iodine [2] Age 	Male 	Female 	Pregnancy 	Lactation
Birth to 6 months 	110 mcg* 	110 mcg* 		
7–12 months 	130 mcg* 	130 mcg* 		
1–3 years 	90 mcg  	90 mcg  		
4–8 years 	90 mcg  	90 mcg  		
9–13 years 	120 mcg  	120 mcg  		
14–18 years 	150 mcg  	150 mcg  	220 mcg 	290 mcg
19+ years 	150 mcg  	150 mcg  	220 mcg 	290 mcg

* Adequate Intake (AI)

The World Health Organization (WHO), United Nations Children’s Fund, and the International Council for the Control of Iodine Deficiency Disorders recommend a slightly higher iodine intake for pregnant women of 250 mcg per day [3,7].
Sources of Iodine
Food

Seaweed (such as kelp, nori, kombu, and wakame) is one of the best food sources of iodine [5]. Other good sources include fish and other seafood as well as eggs (see Table 2). Iodine is also present in human breast milk [2,5] and infant formulas [8].

Dairy products contain iodine. However, the amount of iodine in dairy products varies by whether the cows received iodine feed supplements and whether iodophor sanitizing agents were used to clean the cows and milk-processing equipment [9]. For example, an analysis of 59 samples of nonfat milk found a range of 38 to 160 mcg per cup (with an average of 84 mcg/cup used for Table 2) [8]. Plant-based beverages used as milk substitutes, such as soy and almond beverages, contain relatively small amounts of iodine.

Most commercially prepared bread contains very little iodine unless the manufacturer has used potassium iodate or calcium iodate as a dough conditioner [10,11]. Manufacturers list dough conditioners as an ingredient on product labels but are not required to include iodine on the Nutrition Facts label [12], even though these conditioners provide a substantial amount of iodine. According to 2019 data from the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) Branded Food Products Database, approximately 20% of ingredient labels for white bread, whole-wheat bread, hamburger buns, and hot dog buns listed iodate [13]. Pasta is not a source of iodine unless it is prepared in water containing iodized salt because it absorbs some of the iodine [11].

Most fruits and vegetables are poor sources of iodine, and the amounts they contain are affected by the iodine content of the soil, fertilizer use, and irrigation practices [2,10]. This variability affects the iodine content of meat and animal products because of its impact on the iodine content of foods that the animals consume [14]. The iodine amounts in different seaweed species also vary greatly. For example, commercially available seaweeds in whole or sheet form have iodine concentrations ranging from 16 mcg/g to 2,984 mcg/g [15]. For these reasons, the values for the foods listed in Table 2 are approximate but can be used as a guide for estimating iodine intakes.
Table 2: Iodine Content of Selected Foods [8] Food 	Micrograms (mcg)
per serving 	Percent DV*
Bread, white, enriched, made with iodate dough conditioner, 2 slices** 	296 	197
Bread, whole-wheat, made with iodate dough conditioner, 2 slices** 	273 	182
Cod, baked, 3 ounces 	146 	97
Seaweed, nori, dried, 2 tablespoons, flaked (5 g) 	116 	77
Oysters, cooked, 3 ounces 	93 	62
Yogurt, Greek, plain, nonfat, ¾ cup 	87 	58
Milk, nonfat, 1 cup 	84 	56
Iodized table salt, ¼ teaspoon 	78 	52
Fish sticks, cooked, 3 ounces 	57 	38
Egg, hard boiled, 1 large 	31 	21
Pasta, enriched, boiled in water with iodized salt, 1 cup 	30 	20
Ice cream, chocolate, ⅔ cup 	28 	19
Cheese, cheddar, 1 ounce 	14 	9
Liver, beef, cooked, 3 ounces 	14 	9
Shrimp, cooked, 3 ounces 	13 	9
Tuna, canned in water, drained, 3 ounces 	7 	5
Fruit cocktail in light syrup, canned, ½ cup 	5 	3
Fish sauce, 1 tablespoon 	4 	3
Beef, chuck, roasted, 3 ounces 	3 	2
Soy beverage, 1 cup 	3 	2
Chicken breast, roasted, 3 ounces 	1 	1
Apple juice, 1 cup 	1 	1
Bread, whole-wheat, made without iodate dough conditioner, 2 slices** 	1 	1
Bread, white, enriched, made without iodate dough conditioner, 2 slices** 	1 	1
Sea salt, noniodized, ¼ teaspoon 	0 	0
Rice, brown, cooked, ¾ cup 	0 	0
Corn, canned, ½ cup 	0 	0
Broccoli, boiled, ½ cup 	0 	0
Banana, 1 large 	0 	0
Soy sauce, 1 tablespoon 	0 	0
Lima beans, boiled, ½ cup 	0 	0
Green peas, boiled, ½ cup 	0 	0
Pasta, enriched, boiled in water without iodized salt, 1 cup 	0 	0

*DV = Daily Value. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) developed DVs to help consumers compare the nutrient contents of foods and dietary supplements within the context of a total diet. The DV for iodine is 150 mcg for adults and children age 4 years and older [12]. FDA does not require food labels to list iodine content unless iodine has been added to the food. Foods providing 20% or more of the DV are considered to be high sources of a nutrient, but foods providing lower percentages of the DV also contribute to a healthful diet.
**About 20% of bread products in the United States list iodate dough conditioners on their labels. Products made without these conditioners contain very little iodine.

The USDA, FDA, and ODS-NIH Database for the Iodine Content of Common Foods [8] lists the iodine content of numerous foods and beverages.
Iodized salt

The United States, Canada, and dozens of other countries have salt-iodization programs [3,16,17]. In the United States, salt manufacturers have been adding iodine to table salt since the 1920s, although this practice is still voluntary [18]. FDA has approved the use of potassium iodide and cuprous iodide for salt iodization [19], whereas the WHO recommends the use of potassium iodate due to its greater stability, particularly in warm, damp, or tropical climates [3]. According to its label, iodized salt in the United States contains 45 mcg iodine/g salt (between 1/8 and 1/4 teaspoon); measured salt samples have an average of 47.5–50.7 mcg iodine/g salt [8,18]. However, most salt intake in the United States comes from processed foods, and food manufacturers almost always use noniodized salt in these foods. If they do use iodized salt, they must list the salt as iodized in the ingredient list on the food label [9]. Specialty salts, such as sea salt, kosher salt, Himalayan salt, and fleur de sel, are not usually iodized. Product labels will indicate if the salt is iodized or provides iodide. As shown in Table 2, noniodized sea salt provides virtually no iodine [8].
Dietary supplements

In dietary supplements, iodine is often present as potassium iodide or sodium iodide [20]. Supplements containing kelp, a seaweed that contains iodine, are also available. A small study found that people absorb potassium iodide almost completely (96.4%) [21].

Many multivitamin/mineral supplements contain iodine, often at a dose of 150 mcg [20], and some, but not all, prenatal supplements contain iodine [22]. Dietary supplements containing only iodine are also available, and many contain high doses, sometimes above the UL [20]. Many dietary supplements that contain iodine are listed in the Dietary Supplement Label Database from the NIH [20]. This database contains label information from tens of thousands of dietary supplement products on the U.S. market.
Iodine Intakes and Status
Iodine intakes

The Total Diet Study (TDS), an FDA monitoring program, provides estimated iodine intakes of the U.S. population [23]. Through the TDS program, foods that represent the average U.S. diet are purchased and analyzed for several components, including iodine. Based on analytical results from TDS food samples collected between 2008 and 2012, combined with food consumption estimates, the average daily iodine intake in the United States was 216 mcg/day, with a range from 141 to 296 mcg/day across all age and gender groups [24]. These intakes meet or exceed the EAR for all groups.

TDS data do not include iodine that people obtain from the discretionary use of iodized salt [25,26]. Because many U.S. households use iodized salt, TDS data likely underestimate the true iodine intake of most U.S. residents. Data from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) collected between 1999 and 2004 indicate that 28–29% of adults use iodine-containing dietary supplements [27]; this use also adds to the population’s total iodine intake.
Iodine status of the general U.S. population

Iodine status is typically assessed using urinary iodine measurements. Urinary iodine reflects dietary iodine intake directly because people excrete more than 90% of dietary iodine in the urine [4]. Spot urine iodine measurements are a useful indicator of iodine status within populations [28,29]. However, multiple 24-hour urinary iodine or multiple spot urine measurements are more accurate for individuals [4,30].

Median urinary iodine concentrations, from spot samples collected as part of a large survey, can be used to characterize the iodine status of populations [31]. However, because spot samples are not a suitable indicator of individual iodine status [30], these measurements cannot be used to diagnose individual cases of iodine deficiency or to identify the proportion of a population with iodine deficiency or with excessive iodine intakes [31]. For a population of school-age children or nonpregnant adults to be iodine sufficient, median urinary iodine concentrations should be greater than 100 mcg/L and no more than 20% of the population should have values lower than 50 mcg/L [3].

Urinary iodine measurements from NHANES have been used since 1971 to monitor the iodine status of the U.S. population [32]. Since the inception of the NHANES monitoring program, urinary iodine measurements have shown that the general U.S. population is iodine sufficient. This is despite the fact that urinary iodine levels decreased by more than 50% between 1971–1974 and 1988–1994 [2,33]. Much of this decline was a result of decreased levels of iodine in milk due to the reduced use of iodine-containing feed supplements and iodophor sanitizing agents in the dairy industry [34] as well as the reduced use of iodate dough conditioners by commercial bakers. The use of erythrosine, an iodine-containing food dye commonly used in fruit-flavored breakfast cereals, also decreased during this time [34] though it is unclear to what extent this change actually affected urinary iodine levels because the bioavailability of iodine from erythrosine has been found to be low [35]. This sharp decline in urinary iodine levels caused some concern during the late 1990s that the iodine sufficiency of the U.S. population could be at risk if this trend continued [33].

More recent NHANES measurements indicate that urinary iodine levels have stabilized in the general U.S. population. During 2007–2008, NHANES participants age 6 years and older had a median urinary iodine concentration of 164 mcg/L [36]. Among women of reproductive age, the median urinary iodine concentration in NHANES 2007–2014 was 119 mcg/L [37]. These values have essentially remained unchanged in the last three NHANES surveys, indicating that the dietary iodine intake of the general U.S. population has remained stable since 2000 [36].
Iodine status of U.S. pregnant women

According to the WHO, a median urinary iodine concentration of 150–249 mcg/L indicates adequate iodine nutrition during pregnancy, while values less than 150 mcg/L are considered insufficient [3,7]. Analyses of NHANES datasets from 2003 to 2014 indicate that a substantial portion of pregnant women in the United States are iodine insufficient. Median urinary iodine concentrations for pregnant women participating in NHANES surveys were 181 mcg/L in 2003–2004, 153 mcg/L in 2001–2006, 125 mcg/L in 2005–2008, and 144 mcg/L in 2007–2014 [32,36-38]. Suboptimal iodine status during pregnancy has also been observed in Australia [39].

Pregnant women who do not consume dairy products may be particularly at risk of iodine insufficiency. According to NHANES 2001–2006 data, pregnant women who consumed no dairy products in the previous 24 hours had a median urinary iodine concentration of only 100 mcg/L, compared with 163 mcg/L among consumers of dairy [38]. Women who restrict their dietary salt intake also have lower urinary iodine concentrations and might be more likely to be iodine deficient than women who don’t restrict salt intake [40].

Overall, it appears that the general U.S. population has adequate iodine intake but that some pregnant women may be at risk for iodine deficiency. Continued national iodine monitoring is needed with more emphasis on population subgroups that are most susceptible to iodine deficiency disorders.
Iodine Deficiency

Iodine deficiency has multiple adverse effects on growth and development and is the most common cause of preventable intellectual disability in the world [41]. Iodine deficiency disorders result from inadequate thyroid hormone production secondary to insufficient iodine [5]. During pregnancy and early infancy, iodine deficiency can cause irreversible effects.

Under normal conditions, the body tightly controls thyroid hormone concentrations via TSH. Typically, TSH secretion increases when iodine intake falls below about 100 mcg/day [5]. TSH increases thyroidal iodine uptake from the blood and the production of thyroid hormone. However, very low iodine intakes can reduce thyroid hormone production even in the presence of elevated TSH levels. In addition, it is important to note that TSH concentration may remain within the normal range when iodine intake is low, so TSH is not a sensitive indicator of iodine deficiency [5].

If a person’s iodine intake falls below approximately 10–20 mcg/day, hypothyroidism occurs [1], a condition that is frequently accompanied by goiter. Goiter is usually the earliest clinical sign of iodine deficiency [2]. In pregnant women, iodine deficiency of this magnitude can cause major neurodevelopmental deficits and growth retardation in the fetus as well as miscarriage and stillbirth [5]. Chronic, severe iodine deficiency in utero causes cretinism, a condition characterized by intellectual disability, deaf mutism, motor spasticity, stunted growth, delayed sexual maturation, and other physical and neurological abnormalities [5].

In infants and children, less severe iodine deficiency can also cause neurodevelopmental deficits such as somewhat lower than average intelligence as measured by IQ [1,42,43]. Mild to moderate maternal iodine deficiency has also been associated with an increased risk of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder in children [44]. In adults, mild to moderate iodine deficiency can cause goiter as well as impaired mental function and work productivity secondary to hypothyroidism. Chronic iodine deficiency may be associated with an increased risk of the follicular form of thyroid cancer [45].
Groups at Risk of Iodine Inadequacy

Historically, iodine deficiency was endemic in mountainous regions of the United States and Mexico, and in the so called goiter belt around the Great Lakes [46]. Thanks to a more national food supply, iodized salt, and other factors, overt iodine deficiency is now uncommon in North America. International efforts since the early 1990s have dramatically reduced the incidence of iodine deficiency worldwide, but some groups of people are still at risk of inadequate iodine intake. Iodine insufficiency remains a public health problem in 25 countries with a total population of about 683 million people [47]. The following groups are among those most likely to have inadequate iodine status.
People who do not use iodized salt

The use of iodized salt is the most widely used strategy to control iodine deficiency. Currently, about 88% of households worldwide use iodized salt, but iodine insufficiency is still prevalent in certain regions, particularly Southeast Asia, sub-Saharan Africa, and Eastern Europe [47,48].
Pregnant women

During pregnancy, the RDA for iodine increases from 150 to 220 mcg/day [2]. Surveys indicate that many pregnant women in the United States might consume insufficient amounts of iodine even if they do not have signs or symptoms of overt iodine deficiency [36]. The impact, if any, of this insufficient intake on fetal development is not known.
Vegans and people who eat few or no dairy products, seafood, and eggs

Seafood, eggs, milk, and milk products are among the best sources of iodine. Vegans, people with certain food allergies or lactose intolerance, and others who consume no or minimal amounts of these foods might not obtain sufficient amounts of iodine [49,50].
People living in regions with iodine-deficient soils

Iodine-deficient soils produce crops that have low iodine levels. Mountainous areas (e.g., Himalayas, Alps, and Andes regions) and river valleys prone to flooding (especially in South and Southeast Asia) are among the most iodine-deficient regions in the world [5]. People living in these areas are at risk of iodine deficiency unless they consume iodized salt or foods produced outside the iodine-deficient area.
People with marginal iodine status who eat foods containing goitrogens

Consumption of foods that contain goitrogens, substances that interfere with the uptake of iodine in the thyroid, can exacerbate iodine deficiency [2]. Foods high in goitrogens include soy, cassava, and cruciferous vegetables (e.g., cabbage, broccoli, and cauliflower). Deficiencies of iron and/or vitamin A may also be goitrogenic [51]. These issues are of concern primarily for people living in areas prone to iodine deficiency [6]. For most people, including most of the U.S. population, who have adequate iodine intakes and eat a variety of foods, the consumption of reasonable amounts of foods containing goitrogens is not a concern.
Iodine and Health

Due to its important role in fetal and infant development and thyroid hormone production, iodine is a critical nutrient for proper health at all life stages. This section focuses on four areas of biomedical research examining iodine’s role in health and disease: fetal and infant development, cognitive function during childhood, fibrocystic breast disease, and radiation-induced thyroid cancer. It also includes a section on low iodine diets, which are usually recommended for patients preparing to undergo radioactive iodine treatment.
Fetal and infant development

Iodine sufficiency during pregnancy is extremely important for proper fetal development. During early pregnancy, when fetal thyroid gland development is incomplete, the fetus depends entirely on maternal T4 and, therefore, on maternal iodine intake [52]. Production of T4 increases by approximately 50% during pregnancy [53], requiring a concomitant increase in maternal iodine intake. Sufficient iodine intake after birth is also important for proper physical and neurological growth and maturation.

Research suggests that infants are more sensitive to the effects of iodine deficiency than other age groups, as indicated by changes in their TSH and T4 levels in response to even mild iodine deficiency [54]. Although severe iodine deficiency disorders are uncommon in the United States, mild to moderate iodine insufficiency during pregnancy may subtly affect fetal development [4,55-59]. A meta-analysis of 6,180 mother-child pairs from three birth cohorts in the Netherlands, Spain, and the United Kingdom found that verbal IQ assessed in children at 1.5 to 8 years of age was lower if their mothers had lower iodine status in their first trimester of pregnancy [43]. To accommodate increased iodine needs during pregnancy and lactation, the iodine RDA is 220 mcg/day for pregnant women and 290 mcg/day for lactating women [2]. Similarly, the WHO recommends 250 mcg/day during pregnancy and lactation [3].

Despite the importance of iodine for proper fetal development, the effects of iodine supplements during pregnancy on infant and child neurodevelopment in particular are inconclusive. Two randomized clinical trials had a similar study design in which iodine was provided from early pregnancy to delivery (150 or 200 mcg/day iodine as potassium iodide) and assessed child cognition using the same tool at age 1.5 or 2 years [60,61]. Iodine supplementation had no effect on child cognitive, language, or motor scores [62]. One of these trials also assessed children at age 5–6 years and continued to find no benefit on child neurodevelopment from the mother’s use of iodine [60].

Breast milk contains iodine, although concentrations vary based on maternal iodine levels. Infants who are exclusively breastfed depend on maternal iodine sufficiency for optimal development. In a study of 57 healthy lactating women from the Boston area, median breast milk iodine content was 155 mcg/L [63]. Based on reported infant iodine needs and the typical volume of breast milk consumed, the authors calculated that 47% of the women may have been providing their infants breast milk containing insufficient amounts of iodine. During the weaning period, infants not receiving iodine-containing complementary foods may also be at risk of iodine deficiency, even in countries with iodized salt programs [64,65].

To ensure that adequate amounts of iodine are available for proper fetal and infant development, several national and international groups recommend iodine supplementation during pregnancy, lactation, and early childhood. For women living in countries with weak, sporadic, or uneven iodized salt distribution, the WHO recommends iodine supplementation for all women of childbearing age to achieve a total iodine intake of 150 mcg/day. For pregnant and lactating women in these countries, iodine intakes of 250 mcg/day from both supplements and dietary sources are recommended [3,7]. WHO recommendations for these countries also include breastfeeding through 24 months of age, combined with complementary foods fortified with iodine for children between the ages of 7–24 months [7].

The American Thyroid Association recommends that women who are planning a pregnancy, currently pregnant, or lactating should supplement their diet with 150 mcg/day iodine in the form of potassium iodide [66]. Similarly, the American Academy of Pediatrics recommends that women who are pregnant, planning to become pregnant, or lactating take a daily supplement providing at least 150 mcg iodine and use iodized salt [67].

The use of iodine-containing dietary supplements by pregnant and lactating women in the United States appears to be low compared to current recommendations. Of 59 best-selling prenatal multivitamin supplements on the market in 2016–2017, only 34 contained iodine [22]. The median iodine content was 150 mcg per daily serving, with a range of 25 to 290 mcg; 25 of the 34 provided iodine as potassium iodide. According to 2011–2014 NHANES data, 72.2% of pregnant woman took any dietary supplement, but only 17.8% of them took an iodine-containing product [68]. Among lactating women, 75% took a dietary supplement, but only 19% of them took an iodine-containing product.

Results from a 2010 study, however, raise some questions as to the safety of widespread iodine supplementation in areas of relative iodine sufficiency. In this cross-sectional study, pregnant women living in Spain had a significantly increased risk of hyperthyrotropinemia (TSH >3 microU/mL) if they consumed iodine supplements in doses ≥200 mcg/day compared with those who consumed doses <100 mcg/day [69]. These findings suggest that taking higher doses of supplemental iodine during pregnancy could induce thyroid dysfunction in some women and underscore the need for additional research into the effects on maternal thyroid function of iodine supplementation during pregnancy.

Taken as a whole, these findings indicate that increased public awareness of iodine’s importance during pregnancy and lactation is warranted and that further research into the effects of iodine supplementation during pregnancy is needed. Many researchers, as well as the American Thyroid Association, stress the importance of continued iodine status monitoring among women of reproductive age [1,4,32,38,56,70,71].
Cognitive function during childhood

The effects of severe iodine deficiency on neurological development are well documented. Results from several studies suggest, for example, that chronic, moderate to severe iodine deficiency, particularly in children, reduces IQ by about 12–13.5 points [53]. A 2004 Cochrane Review concluded that iodine supplementation in children living in areas of iodine deficiency appears to both positively affect physical and mental development and decrease mortality with only minor and transient adverse effects [72].

The effects of mild iodine deficiency during childhood are more difficult to quantify. Some research suggests that mild iodine deficiency is associated with subtle neurodevelopmental deficits and that iodine supplementation might improve cognitive function in mildly iodine-deficient children [52].

In a 2009 randomized, placebo-controlled study, 184 children age 10–13 years in New Zealand with a median urinary iodine concentration of 63 mcg/L received iodine supplements (150 mcg/day) or placebo for 28 weeks [73]. Iodine supplementation improved iodine status (median urinary iodine concentration after supplementation was 145 mcg/L) and significantly improved measures of perceptual reasoning and overall cognitive score compared with children taking a placebo. These findings suggest that correcting mild iodine deficiency in children could improve certain components of cognition. Additional research is required to fully understand the effects of mild iodine deficiency and iodine supplementation on cognitive function.
Fibrocystic breast disease

Fibrocystic breast disease is a benign condition characterized by lumpy, painful breasts and palpable fibrosis. It commonly affects women of reproductive age, but it can also occur during menopause, especially in women taking estrogens [74]. Breast tissue has a high concentration of iodine, especially during pregnancy and lactation [4,75]. Some research suggests that iodine supplementation might be helpful for fibrocystic breast disease, although a specific mechanism of action has not been established [76] and data are limited.

In a double-blind study, researchers randomly assigned 56 women with fibrocystic breast disease to receive daily supplements of iodine (70 to 90 mcg I2/kg body weight) or placebo for 6 months [74]. At treatment completion, 65% of the women receiving iodine reported decreased pain compared with 33% of women in the placebo group. A more recent randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial had similar findings. In this study, researchers randomly assigned 111 women (18–50 years of age) with fibrosis and a history of breast pain to receive tablets containing 0 mcg, 1,500 mcg, 3,000 mcg, or 6,000 mcg of iodine per day [76]. After 5 months of treatment, women receiving doses of 3,000 or 6,000 mcg iodine had a significant decrease in breast pain, tenderness, and nodularity compared with those receiving placebo or 1,500 mcg iodine. The researchers also reported a dose-dependent reduction in self-assessed pain. None of the doses was associated with major adverse events or changes in thyroid function test results.

Although the results of these studies are promising, more research is needed to clarify iodine’s role in fibrocystic breast disease. Moreover, the doses used in these studies (approximately 1,500–6,000 mcg per day) are several times higher than the iodine UL of 1,100 mcg for adults. Doses of this magnitude should only be used under the guidance of a physician [2].
Radiation-induced thyroid cancer

Nuclear accidents can release radioactive iodine into the environment, increasing the risk of thyroid cancer in exposed individuals, especially children [77,78]. Thyroidal uptake of radioactive iodine is higher in people with iodine deficiency than in people with iodine sufficiency. For this reason, iodine-deficient individuals have a particularly high risk of developing radiation-induced thyroid cancer when exposed to radioactive iodine.

FDA has approved potassium iodide as a thyroid-blocking agent to reduce the risk of thyroid cancer in radiation emergencies involving the release of radioactive iodine [77]. FDA recommends that exposed people take a daily pharmacological dose (16–130 mg potassium iodide, depending on age) until the risk of significant radiation exposure ends [77,78]. Potassium iodide was widely used in Poland following the 1986 Chernobyl accident and childhood thyroid cancer rates did not increase substantially in subsequent years [79]. In areas where iodide prophylaxis was not used, such as Belarus and Ukraine, where many children were mildly iodine deficient, the incidence of thyroid cancer sharply increased among children and adolescents [77].
Low iodine diets for radioactive iodine treatment

Patients preparing to undergo radioactive iodine treatment for differentiated thyroid cancer are usually instructed to follow a low iodine diet prior to treatment. The rationale behind this guidance is to deplete iodine levels in the body and increase thyroidal uptake of the radioactive iodine (iodine–131) [80-82].

A low iodine diet typically limits iodine intake to 50 mcg/day or less for 1 to 2 weeks before treatment [80-83]. Specific recommendations vary, however, and research is ongoing to define optimal guidelines for low iodine diets. For example, one study in an area of the Netherlands with sufficient iodine status found that following a low iodine diet for 4 days might adequately prepare patients for radioactive iodine treatment [84]. This study examined 24-hour urinary iodine excretion in 65 patients with differentiated thyroid cancer who followed a low iodine diet (less than 50 mcg/day) for 7 days. Iodine excretion on day 4 of the low iodine diet was not significantly different than that on day 7. However, the authors noted that following a low iodine diet for only 4 days might not be sufficient for people living in iodine-rich areas.

People following a low iodine diet should avoid many foods, including iodized salt, fish and other seafood, seaweed, milk and milk products, liver, and eggs. They should also avoid bread and other grain products made with iodate dough conditioners, as well as maraschino cherries and some red or pink beverages because these products are often made with iodine-containing red dyes [8,82,85]. Foods that are relatively low in iodine include noniodized salt (including many sea salts), fruits and fruit juices, vegetables, plant-based milk substitutes (such as soy and almond beverages), rice, pasta, oatmeal, beans, nuts, poultry, pork, beef (except liver), and bread that does not contain iodate dough conditioners.

Nutrition Facts labels on foods do not usually list iodine unless the manufacturer has added iodine to the food. Therefore, Nutrition Facts labels cannot be relied upon to identify foods that naturally contain iodine, such as seaweed, fish, and other seafood.

Iodine is also present in some dietary supplements, including products containing kelp and many multivitamin/mineral supplements [20]. The Supplement Facts labels on dietary supplement products will indicate whether iodine is present and at what dose.

Patients preparing for radioactive iodine treatment may develop hyponatremia, especially if they are undergoing thyroid hormone withdrawal [86]. To reduce the risk of hyponatremia, the American Thyroid Association notes that noniodized salt use should not be restricted when following a low iodine diet [83] . Other groups at risk for hyponatremia include people who are over 65 years of age, females, and those taking thiazide diuretics [82]. Noniodized salt is available in grocery stores. In addition, almost all salt used in processed foods in the United States is noniodized; product labels will indicate if the manufacturer used salt that is iodized or provides iodine [9].

The following resources may be helpful for clinicians and patients when planning low iodine diets to prepare for radioactive iodine treatment:

    “Low Iodine Diet” from the American Thyroid Association provides guidelines and menu options for meals and snacks.
    The USDA, FDA, and ODS-NIH Database for the Iodine Content of Common Foods lists the iodine content per serving and per 100-gram amounts of hundreds of foods and beverages. Includes food descriptions, as well as means, standard deviations, value ranges, sample sizes, and supporting documentation.
    “Thyroid Cancer Treatment” from the National Cancer Institute includes information on radioactive iodine therapy.
    “Childhood Thyroid Cancer Treatment” from the National Cancer Institute provides information about risk factors, clinical presentation, diagnosis, and treatment of different types of childhood thyroid cancer.

Despite widespread recommendations to follow a low iodine diet prior to radioactive iodine treatment, results from studies examining the impact of this practice on treatment success are inconsistent [80,82,83]. The authors of a 2022 systematic review and meta-analysis of 56 quantitative and 3 qualitative studies concluded that low iodine diets reduce iodine status [87]. However, results were unclear on whether this improves the success of radioactive iodine treatment. In addition, studies have not examined whether following a low iodine diet to prepare for radioactive iodine treatment affects long-term disease recurrence or mortality [83].
Health Risks from Excessive Iodine

High intakes of iodine can cause some of the same symptoms as iodine deficiency—including goiter, elevated TSH levels, and hypothyroidism—because excess iodine in susceptible individuals inhibits thyroid hormone synthesis and thereby increases TSH stimulation, which can produce goiter [2,88]. Iodine-induced hyperthyroidism can also result from high iodine intakes, including when iodine is administered to treat iodine deficiency. Studies have also shown that excessive iodine intakes cause thyroiditis and thyroid papillary cancer [2,88]. Cases of acute iodine poisoning are rare and are usually caused by doses of many grams. Acute poisoning symptoms include burning of the mouth, throat, and stomach; fever; abdominal pain; nausea; vomiting; diarrhea; weak pulse; and coma [2].

Responses to excess iodine and the doses required to cause adverse effects vary [89]. Some people, such as those with autoimmune thyroid disease and iodine deficiency, may experience adverse effects with iodine intakes considered safe for the general population [2,5].

The FNB has established iodine ULs for food and supplement intakes (Table 3). In most people, iodine intakes from foods and supplements are unlikely to exceed the UL [2]. Long-term intakes above the UL increase the risk of adverse health effects. The ULs do not apply to individuals receiving iodine for medical treatment, but such individuals should be under the care of a physician [2].
Table 3: Tolerable Upper Intake Levels (ULs) for Iodine [2] Age 	Male 	Female 	Pregnancy 	Lactation
Birth to 6 months 	Not possible to establish* 	Not possible to establish* 		
7–12 months 	Not possible to establish* 	Not possible to establish* 		
1–3 years 	200 mcg 	200 mcg 		
4–8 years 	300 mcg 	300 mcg 		
9–13 years 	600 mcg 	600 mcg 		
14–18 years 	900 mcg 	900 mcg 	900 mcg 	900 mcg
19+ years 	1,100 mcg 	1,100 mcg 	1,100 mcg 	1,100 mcg

* Formula and food should be the only sources of iodine for infants.
Interactions with Medications

Iodine supplements have the potential to interact with several types of medications. A few examples are provided below. Individuals taking these medications on a regular basis should discuss their iodine intakes with their health care providers.
Antithyroid medications

Antithyroid medications, such as methimazole (Tapazole), are used to treat hyperthyroidism. Taking high doses of iodine with antithyroid medications can have an additive effect [89] and could cause hypothyroidism.
Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors

Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, such as benazepril (Lotensin), lisinopril (Prinivil and Zestril), and fosinopril (Monopril), are used primarily to treat high blood pressure. Taking potassium iodide with ACE inhibitors can increase the risk of hyperkalemia (elevated blood levels of potassium) [89].
Potassium-sparing diuretics

Taking potassium iodide with potassium-sparing diuretics, such as spironolactone (Aldactone) and amiloride (Midamor), can increase the risk of hyperkalemia [89].
Iodine and Healthful Diets

The federal government's 2020–2025 Dietary Guidelines for Americans notes that "Because foods provide an array of nutrients and other components that have benefits for health, nutritional needs should be met primarily through foods. ... In some cases, fortified foods and dietary supplements are useful when it is not possible otherwise to meet needs for one or more nutrients (e.g., during specific life stages such as pregnancy)."

For more information about building a healthy dietary pattern, refer to the Dietary Guidelines for Americans and the USDA's MyPlate.

The Dietary Guidelines for Americans describes a healthy dietary pattern as one that

    Includes a variety of vegetables; fruits; grains (at least half whole grains); fat-free and low-fat milk, yogurt, and cheese; and oils.
        Milk and milk products contain iodine.
    Includes a variety of protein foods such as lean meats; poultry; eggs; seafood; beans, peas, and lentils; nuts and seeds; and soy products.
        Some fish contain high amounts of iodine. Eggs are also good sources of iodine.
    Limits foods and beverages higher in added sugars, saturated fat, and sodium.
    Limits alcoholic beverages.
    Stays within your daily calorie needs.

References

    National Research Council, Committee to Assess the Health Implications of Perchlorate Ingestion. Health Implications of Perchlorate Ingestion. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press, 2005.
    Institute of Medicine, Food and Nutrition Board. Dietary Reference Intakes for Vitamin A, Vitamin K, Arsenic, Boron, Chromium, Copper, Iodine, Iron, Manganese, Molybdenum, Nickel, Silicon, Vanadium, and Zinc. Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 2001.
    World Health Organization. United Nations Children's Fund & International Council for the Control of Iodine Deficiency Disorders. Assessment of iodine deficiency disorders and monitoring their elimination. 3rd ed. Geneva, Switzerland: WHO, 2007.
    Patrick L. Iodine: deficiency and therapeutic considerations. Altern Med Rev. 2008 Jun;13(2):116-127. [PubMed abstract]
    Zimmermann MB. Iodine deficiency. Endocr Rev. 2009 Jun;30(4):376-408. [PubMed abstract]
    Zimmermann MB, Jooste PL, Pandav CS. Iodine-deficiency disorders. Lancet. 2008 Oct 4;372(9645):1251-1262. [PubMed abstract]
    WHO Secretariat, Andersson M, de Benoist B, Delange F, Zupan J. Prevention and control of iodine deficiency in pregnant and lactating women and in children less than 2-years-old: conclusions and recommendations of the Technical Consultation. Public Health Nutr. 2007 Dec;10(12A):1606-1611. [PubMed abstract]
    USDA, FDA, and ODS-NIH Database for the Iodine Content of Common Foods Release 4.0. 2024.
    Pennington JA, Young B. Iron, zinc, copper, manganese, selenium, and iodine in foods from the United States Total Diet Study. J Food Compost Anal. 1990 June;3(2):166-184.
    Ershow AG, Skeaff SA, Merkel JM, Pehrsson PR. Development of databases on iodine in foods and dietary supplements. Nutrients 2018;10;100:1-20. [PubMed abstract]
    Patterson KY, Spungen JH, Roseland JM, Pehrsson PR, Ershow AG, Gahche JJ. USDA-FDA-ODS database for the iodine content of common foods (release one). Iodine database PDF. Methods and Application of Food Composition Laboratory, Beltsville Human Nutrition Research Center, Agricultural Research Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Beltsville MD. July 2020.
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Food Labeling: Revision of the Nutrition and Supplement Facts Labels. 2016.
    Roseland J. Personal Communication. August 13, 2020.
    Pennington JAT, Schoen SA, Salmon GD, Young B, Johnson RD, Marts RW. Composition of Core Foods of the U.S. Food Supply, 1982-1991. III. Copper, Manganese, Selenium, and Iodine. J Food Comp Anal. 1995;8(2):171-217.
    Teas J, Pino S, Critchley A, Braverman LE. Variability of iodine content in common commercially available edible seaweeds. Thyroid. 2004 Oct;14(10):836-841. [PubMed abstract]
    Global Fortification Data Exchange. Fortification Legislation.
    UNICEF Data. Iodized salt data.
    Dasgupta PK, Liu Y, Dyke JV. Iodine nutrition: iodine content of iodized salt in the United States. Environ Sci Technol. 2008 Feb 15;42(4):1315-1323. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration, Code of Federal Regulations, CFR 21, Sections 184.1634 and 184.1265. Revised April 1, 2009.
    National Institutes of Health. Dietary Supplement Label Database. 2020.
    Aquaron R, Delange F, Marchal P, Lognoné V, Ninane L. Bioavailability of seaweed iodine in human beings. Cell Mol Biol (Noisy-le-grand). 2002 Jul;48(5):563-569. [PubMed abstract]
    Patel A, Lee SY, Stagnaro-Green A, MacKay D, Wong AW, Pearce EN. Iodine content of the best-selling United States adult and prenatal multivitamin preparations. Thyroid 2019;29:124-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Murray CW, Egan SK, Kim H, Beru N, Bolger PM. US Food and Drug Administration's Total Diet Study: dietary intake of perchlorate and iodine. J Expo Sci Environ Epidemiol. 2008 Nov;18(6):571-580. [PubMed abstract]
    Abt E, Spungen J, Pouillot R, Gamalo-Siebers M, Wirtz M. Update on dietary intake of perchlorate and iodine from U.S. food and drug administration's total diet study: 2008-2012. J Expo Sci Environ Epidemiol 2018;28:21-30. [PubMed abstract]
    Pennington JA, Young BE, Wilson DB. Nutritional elements in U.S. diets: results from the Total Diet Study, 1982 to 1986. J Am Diet Assoc. 1989 May;89(5):659-664. [PubMed abstract]
    Pennington JA, Young BE. Total diet study nutritional elements, 1982-1989. J Am Diet Assoc. 1991 Feb;91(2):179-183. [PubMed abstract]
    Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS). National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey Data. Hyattsville, MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Accessed 11/14/2009.
    Ristic-Medic D, Piskackova Z, Hooper L, Ruprich J, Casgrain A, Ashton K, Pavlovic M, Glibetic M. Methods of assessment of iodine status in humans: a systematic review. Am J Clin Nutr. 2009 Jun;89(6):2052S-2069S. [PubMed abstract]
    Zimmermann MB. Methods to assess iron and iodine status. Br J Nutr. 2008 Jun;99 Suppl 3:S2-9. [PubMed abstract]
    König F, Andersson M, Hotz K, Aeberli I, Zimmermann MB. Ten repeat collections for urinary iodine from spot samples or 24-hour samples are needed to reliably estimate individual iodine status in women. J Nutr 2011;141:2049-54. [PubMed abstract]
    United Nations Children’s Fund. Guidance on the monitoring of salt iodization programmes and determination of population iodine status. 2018.
    Caldwell KL, Miller GA, Wang RY, Jain RB, Jones RL. Iodine status of the U.S. population, National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 2003-2004. Thyroid. 2008 Nov;18(11):1207-1214. [PubMed abstract]
    Hollowell JG, Staehling NW, Hannon WH, Flanders DW, Gunter EW, Maberly GF, Braverman LE, Pino S, Miller DT, Garbe PL, DeLozier DM, Jackson RJ. Iodine nutrition in the United States. Trends and public health implications: iodine excretion data from National Health and Nutrition Examination Surveys I and III (1971-1974 and 1988-1994). J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1998 Oct;83(10):3401-3408. [PubMed abstract]
    Pennington JA, Schoen SA. Total diet study: estimated dietary intakes of nutritional elements, 1982-1991. Int J Vitam Nutr Res. 1996;66(4):350-362. [PubMed abstract]
    Poulsen E. Case study: erythrosine. Food Addit Contam. 1993 May-Jun;10(3):315-323. [PubMed abstract]
    Caldwell KL, Makhmudov A, Ely E, Jones RL, Wang RY. Iodine Status of the U.S.Population, National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, 2005-2006 and 2007-2008. Thyroid. 2011 Feb 16. [PubMed abstract]
    Perrine CG, Herrick KA, Gupta PM, Caldwell KL. Iodine status of pregnant women and women of reproductive age in the United States. Thyroid 2019;29:153-4. [PubMed abstract]
    Perrine CG, Herrick K, Serdula MK, Sullivan KM. Some subgroups of reproductive age women in the United States may be at risk for iodine deficiency. J Nutr. 2010 Aug;140(8):1489-1494. [PubMed abstract]
    Charlton KE, Gemming L, Yeatman H, Ma G. Suboptimal iodine status of Australian pregnant women reflects poor knowledge and practices related to iodine nutrition. Nutrition. 2010 Oct;26(10):963-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Tayie FA, Jourdan K. Hypertension, dietary salt restriction, and iodine deficiency among adults. Am J Hypertens. 2010 Oct;23(10):1095-1102. [PubMed abstract]
    Iodine Global Network.
    Santiago-Fernandez P, Torres-Barahona R, Muela-Martínez JA, Rojo-Martínez G, García-Fuentes E, Garriga MJ, León AG, Soriguer F. Intelligence quotient and iodine intake: a cross-sectional study in children. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2004 Aug;89(8):3851-3857. [PubMed abstract]
    Levie D, Korevaar TIM, Bath SC, Murcia M, Dineva M, Llop S, Espada M, van Herwaarden AE, de Rijke YB, Ibarluzea JM, Sunyer J, Tiemeier H, Rayman MP, Guxens M, Peeters RP. Association of maternal iodine status with child IQ: A meta-analysis of individual participant data. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2019;104:5957-67. [PubMed abstract]
    Vermiglio F, Lo Presti VP, Moleti M, Sidoti M, Tortorella G, Scaffidi G, Castagna MG, Mattina F, Violi MA, Crisà A, Artemisia A, Trimarchi F. Attention deficit and hyperactivity disorders in the offspring of mothers exposed to mild-moderate iodine deficiency: a possible novel iodine deficiency disorder in developed countries. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2004 Dec;89(12):6054-6060. [PubMed abstract]
    Zimmermann MB, Galetti V. Iodine intake as a risk factor for thyroid cancer: A comprehensive review of animal and human studies. Thyroid Res 2015;8:8. [PubMed abstract]
    Cooper LF, Barber EM, Mitchell HS. Nutrition in Health and Disease, 9th ed. J.B. Lippincott Co, Philadelphia. 1943, pg 66.
    The Iodine Global Network. Global scorecard of iodine nutrition in 2019.
    UNICEF. The State of the World's Children 2019.
    Pearce EN. Is Iodine Deficiency Reemerging in the United States? AACE Clinical Case Reports 2015;1:e81-e82.
    Chow A, Cai X, Hu S, and Wang X. Iodine deficiency–induced goiter in central New Jersey: a case series. AACE Clinical Case Reports 2015;1:e40-e44.
    Hess SY. The impact of common micronutrient deficiencies on iodine and thyroid metabolism: the evidence from human studies. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Feb;24(1):117-132. [PubMed abstract]
    Melse-Boonstra A, Jaiswal N. Iodine deficiency in pregnancy, infancy and childhood and its consequences for brain development. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Feb;24(1):29-38. [PubMed abstract]
    Zimmermann MB. Iodine deficiency in pregnancy and the effects of maternal iodine supplementation on the offspring: a review. Am J Clin Nutr. 2009 Feb;89(2):668S-672S. [PubMed abstract]
    Delange F. Iodine requirements during pregnancy, lactation and the neonatal period and indicators of optimal iodine nutrition. Public Health Nutr. 2007 Dec;10(12A):1571-1580. [PubMed abstract]
    Pearce EN, Bazrafshan HR, He X, Pino S, Braverman LE. Dietary iodine in pregnant women from the Boston, Massachusetts area. Thyroid. 2004 Apr;14(4):327-328. [PubMed abstract]
    Hollowell JG, Haddow JE. The prevalence of iodine deficiency in women of reproductive age in the United States of America. Public Health Nutr. 2007 Dec;10(12A):1532-1539; discussion 1540-1541. [PubMed abstract]
    Bath SC, Steer CD, Golding J, Emmett P, Rayman MP. Effect of inadequate iodine status in UK pregnant women on cognitive outcomes in their children: Results from the Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents and Children (ALSPAC). Lancet 2013;382:331-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Hynes KL, Otahal P, Burgess JR, Oddy WH, Hay I. Reduced educational outcomes persist into adolescence following mild iodine deficiency in utero, despite adequacy in childhood: 15-year follow-up of the gestational iodine cohort investigating auditory processing speed and working memory. Nutrients 2017;9:1354. [PubMed abstract]
    Abel MH, Brandlistuen RE, Caspersen IH, Aase H, Torheim LE, Meltzer HM, Brantsaeter AL. Language delay and poorer school performance in children of mothers with inadequate iodine intake in pregnancy: Results from follow-up at 8 years in the Norwegian Mother and Child Cohort Study. European Journal of Nutrition 2019;58:3047-58. [PubMed abstract]
    Gowachirapant S, Jaiswal N, Melse-Boonstra A, Galetti V,Stinca S, Mackenzie I, et al. Effect of iodine supplementation in pregnant women on child neurodevelopment: A randoised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2017;5:853-63. [PubMed abstract]
    Zhou SJ, Skeaff SA, Ruan P, Doyle LW, Anderson PJ, Komman L, et al. The effect of iodine supplementation in pregnancy on early childhood neurodevelopment and clinical outcomes: Results of an aborted randomised placebo-controlled trial. Trials 2015;16:563. [PubMed abstract]
    Dineva M, Fishpool H, Rayman MP, Mendis J, Bath SC. Systematic review and meta-analysis of the effects of iodine supplementation on thyroid function and child neurodevelopment in mildly-to-moderately iodine-deficient pregnant women. Am J Clin Nutr. 2020. Published online ahead of print.
    Pearce EN, Leung AM, Blount BC, Bazrafshan HR, He X, Pino S, Valentin-Blasini L, Braverman LE. Breast milk iodine and perchlorate concentrations in lactating Boston-area women. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2007 May;92(5):1673-1677. [PubMed abstract]
    Andersson M, Aeberli I, Wüst N, Piacenza AM, Bucher T, Henschen I, Haldimann M, Zimmermann MB. The Swiss Iodized Salt Program Provides Adequate Iodine for School Children and Pregnant Women, but Weaning Infants Not Receiving Iodine-Containing Complementary Foods as well as Their Mothers Are Iodine Deficient. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2010;95:5217-24. [PubMed abstract]
    Fallah R, Du L, Braverman LE, He X, Segura-Harrison M, Yeh MW, et al. Iodine nutrition in weaning infants in the United States. Thyroid 2019;29:573-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Alexander EK, Pearce EN, Brent GA, Brown RS, Chen H, Dosiou C, et al. 2017 guidelines of the American Thyroid Association for the diagnosis and management of thyroid disease during pregnancy and the postpartum. Thyroid 2017;27:315-89. [PubMed abstract]
    Council on Environmental Health, Rogan WJ, Paulson JA, Baum C, Brock-Utne AC, Brumberg HL, et al. Iodine deficiency, pollutant chemicals, and the thyroid: New information on an old problem. Pediatrics 2014;133:1163-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Gupta PM, Gahche JJ, Herrick KA, Ershow AG, Potischman N, Perrine CG. Use of iodine-containing dietary supplements remains low among women of reproductive age in the United States: NHANES 2011-2014. Nutrients 2018, 10, 422; doi: 10.3390/nu10040422. [PubMed abstract]
    Rebagliato M, Murcia M, Espada M, Alvarez-Pedrerol M, Bolúmar F, Vioque J, Basterrechea M, Blarduni E, Ramón R, Guxens M, Foradada CM, Ballester F, Ibarluzea J, Sunyer J. Iodine intake and maternal thyroid function during pregnancy. Epidemiology. 2010 Jan;21(1):62-69. [PubMed abstract]
    Pearce EN. What do we know about iodine supplementation in pregnancy? J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2009 Sep;94(9):3188-3190. [PubMed abstract]
    Public Health Committee of the American Thyroid Association, Becker DV, Braverman LE, Delange F, Dunn JT, Franklyn JA, Hollowell JG, Lamm SH, Mitchell ML, Pearce E, Robbins J, Rovet JF. Iodine supplementation for pregnancy and lactation-United States and Canada: recommendations of the American Thyroid Association. Thyroid. 2006 Oct;16(10):949-951. [PubMed abstract]
    Angermayr L, Clar C. Iodine supplementation for preventing iodine deficiency disorders in children. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2004;(2):CD003819. [PubMed abstract]
    Gordon RC, Rose MC, Skeaff SA, Gray AR, Morgan KM, Ruffman T. Iodine supplementation improves cognition in mildly iodine-deficient children. Am J Clin Nutr. 2009 Nov;90(5):1264-1271. [PubMed abstract]
    Ghent WR, Eskin BA, Low DA, Hill LP. Iodine replacement in fibrocystic disease of the breast. Can J Surg. 1993 Oct;36(5):453-460. [PubMed abstract]
    Azizi F, Smyth P. Breastfeeding and maternal and infant iodine nutrition. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2009 May;70(5):803-809. [PubMed abstract]
    Kessler JH. The effect of supraphysiologic levels of iodine on patients with cyclic mastalgia. Breast J. 2004 Jul-Aug;10(4):328-336. [PubMed abstract]
    Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, Food and Drug Administration. Guidance. Potassium iodide as a thyroid blocking agent in radiation emergencies. December 2001.
    World Health Organization. Guidelines for Iodine Prophylaxis following Nuclear Accidents. 1999.
    Nauman J, Wolff J. Iodide prophylaxis in Poland after the Chernobyl reactor accident: benefits and risks. Am J Med 1993;94:524-532. [PubMed abstract]
    Sawka AM, Ibrahim-Zada I, Galacgac P, Tsang RW, Brierley JD, et al. (2010). Dietary iodine restriction in preparation for radioactive iodine treatment or scanning in well-differentiated thyroid cancer: a systematic review. Thyroid 20(10): 1129-1138. [PubMed abstract]
    Lee SL (2012). Radioactive iodine therapy. Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes 19(5): 420-428. [PubMed abstract]
    Li JH, He ZH, Bansal V, Hennessey JV (2016). Low iodine diet in differentiated thyroid cancer: a review. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 84(1): 3-12. [PubMed abstract]
    Haugen BR, Alexander EK, Bible KC, Doherty GM, Mandel SJ, et al. (2016). 2015 American Thyroid Association Management Guidelines for Adult Patients with Thyroid Nodules and Differentiated Thyroid Cancer: The American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force on Thyroid Nodules and Differentiated Thyroid Cancer. Thyroid 26(1): 1-133. [PubMed abstract]
    Dekker BL, Links MH, Muller Kobold AC, Swart-Busscher LG, Kars M, et al. (2022). Low-Iodine Diet of 4 Days Is Sufficient Preparation for 131I Therapy in Differentiated Thyroid Cancer Patients. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 107(2): e604-e611. [PubMed abstract]
    American Thyroid Association. Low Iodine Diet.
    Takata N, Miyagawa M, Okada T, Kawaguchi N, Fujimoto Y, et al. (2023). Effect of preparation method for radioactive iodine therapy on serum electrolytes. Jpn J Radiol 41(11): 1247-1254. [PubMed abstract]
    Herbert G, England C, Perry R, Whitmarsh A, Moore T, et al. (2022). Impact of low iodine diets on ablation success in differentiated thyroid cancer: A mixed-methods systematic review and meta-analysis. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 97(6): 702-729. [PubMed abstract]
    Pennington JA. A review of iodine toxicity reports. J Am Diet Assoc. 1990 Nov;90(11):1571-1581. [PubMed abstract]
    Natural Medicines Comprehensive Database. Iodine. Accessed 10/13/2009.

Disclaimer

This fact sheet by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Office of Dietary Supplements (ODS) provides information that should not take the place of medical advice. We encourage you to talk to your health care providers (doctor, registered dietitian, pharmacist, etc.) about your interest in, questions about, or use of dietary supplements and what may be best for your overall health. Any mention in this publication of a specific product or service, or recommendation from an organization or professional society, does not represent an endorsement by ODS of that product, service, or expert advice.

Updated: November 5, 2024


 Iron: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals (original version)
Iron: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals
Table of Contents

    Introduction
    Recommended Intakes
    Sources of Iron
    Iron Intakes and Status
    Iron Deficiency
    Groups at Risk of Iron Inadequacy
    Iron and Health
    Health Risks from Excessive Iron
    Interactions with Medications
    Iron and Healthful Diets
    References
    Disclaimer

Introduction

Iron is a mineral that is naturally present in many foods, added to some food products, and available as a dietary supplement. Iron is an essential component of hemoglobin, an erythrocyte (red blood cell) protein that transfers oxygen from the lungs to the tissues [1]. As a component of myoglobin, another protein that provides oxygen, iron supports muscle metabolism and healthy connective tissue [2]. Iron is also necessary for physical growth, neurological development, cellular functioning, and the synthesis of some hormones [2,3].

Dietary iron has two main forms: heme and nonheme [1]. Plants and iron-fortified foods contain nonheme iron only, whereas meat, seafood, and poultry contain both heme and nonheme iron [2]. Heme iron, which forms when iron combines with protoporphyrin IX, contributes about 10% to 15% of total iron intakes in western populations [3-5].

Most of the 3 to 4 grams (g) of elemental iron that is present in adults is found in hemoglobin [2]. Much of the remaining iron is stored in the form of ferritin or hemosiderin (a degradation product of ferritin) in the liver, spleen, and bone marrow, or it is located in the myoglobin of muscle tissue [1,5]. Transferrin is the main protein in blood that binds to iron and transports it throughout the body. Humans typically lose only small amounts of iron in urine, feces, sweat, and shed skin cells. Losses are greater in menstruating women because of blood loss. Hepcidin, a circulating peptide hormone, is the key regulator of both iron absorption and the distribution of iron throughout the body, including in plasma [1,2,6].
Assessing iron status

Hemoglobin and hematocrit are the most commonly used measures to screen patients for iron deficiency, although they are neither sensitive nor specific. Serum ferritin concentration, which is a measure of the body’s iron stores, is also used, but it can be affected by inflammation. Often, health care providers will use multiple measurements to diagnose iron deficiency. They may also consider a patient’s dietary and supplemental iron intakes and how those compare to intake recommendations.

The assessment of iron status depends almost entirely on hematological indicators [7]. However, these indicators are not sensitive or specific enough to adequately describe the full spectrum of iron status, and this can complicate the diagnosis of iron deficiency. A complementary approach is to consider how iron intakes from the diet and dietary supplements compare with recommended intakes.

Iron deficiency progresses from the depletion of iron stores (mild iron deficiency), to iron-deficiency erythropoiesis (erythrocyte production), and finally to iron deficiency anemia (IDA) [8,9]. With iron-deficiency erythropoiesis (also known as marginal iron deficiency), iron stores are depleted and transferrin saturation declines, but hemoglobin levels are usually within the normal range. IDA is characterized by low hemoglobin concentrations and decreases in hematocrit (the proportion of red blood cells in blood by volume) and mean corpuscular volume (a measure of erythrocyte size) [2,10].

Serum ferritin concentration, a measure of the body's iron stores, is currently the most efficient and cost-effective test for diagnosing iron deficiency [11-13]. Because serum ferritin concentration decreases during the first stage of iron depletion, it can be used to identify low iron status before the onset of IDA [7,9,14]. A serum ferritin concentration that is lower than 30 micrograms/liter (mcg/L) suggests iron deficiency, and a value lower than 10 mcg/L suggests IDA [15]. However, it should be noted that inflammation (e.g., in those with infectious diseases) can elevate serum ferritin concentrations [16].

Hemoglobin and hematocrit tests are the most commonly used measures to screen patients for iron deficiency, even though they are neither sensitive nor specific [5,7,17]. Often, hemoglobin concentrations are combined with serum ferritin measurements to identify IDA [7]. Hemoglobin concentrations lower than 11 g/deciliter (dL) in children under 10 years of age, or lower than 12 g/dL in individuals age 10 years or older, suggest IDA [8]. Normal hematocrit values are approximately 41% to 50% in males and 36% to 44% in females [18].
Recommended Intakes

The Food and Nutrition Board at the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine has established Recommended Dietary Allowances and Adequate Intakes for iron. These values range from 8 to 27 mg for adults and from 0.27 to 27 mg for infants, children, and adolescents, depending on age, sex, and life stage. People who follow vegetarian diets need more iron than those who include animal products in their diet due to the decreased bioavailability of nonheme iron from plant-based foods.

Intake recommendations for iron and other nutrients are provided in the Dietary Reference Intakes (DRIs) developed by the Food and Nutrition Board (FNB) at the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine [5]. DRI is the general term for a set of reference values used for planning and assessing nutrient intakes of healthy people. These values include the following:

    Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA): Average daily level of intake sufficient to meet the nutrient requirements of nearly all (97%–98%) healthy individuals; often used to plan nutritionally adequate diets for individuals
    Adequate Intake (AI): Intake at this level is assumed to ensure nutritional adequacy; established when evidence is insufficient to develop an RDA
    Estimated Average Requirement (EAR): Average daily level of intake estimated to meet the requirements of 50% of healthy individuals; usually used to assess the nutrient intakes of groups of people and to plan nutritionally adequate diets for them; can also be used to assess the nutrient intakes of individuals
    Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL): Maximum daily intake unlikely to cause adverse health effects

Table 1 lists the current iron RDAs. The requirement for iron is 1.8 times higher for people who follow vegetarian diets than those for people who include animal products in their diet, such as meat. This is because heme iron from meat is more bioavailable than nonheme iron from plant-based foods. In addition, animal products such as meat, poultry, and seafood increase the absorption of nonheme iron [5].

For infants from birth to 6 months, the FNB established an AI for iron that is equivalent to the mean intake of iron in healthy, breastfed infants.
Table 1: Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDAs) for Iron in Milligrams (mg) [5] Age 	Male 	Female 	Pregnancy 	Lactation
0–6 months 	0.27 mg* 	0.27 mg* 		
7–12 months 	11 mg 	11 mg 		
1–3 years 	7 mg 	7 mg 		
4–8 years 	10 mg 	10 mg 		
9–13 years 	8 mg 	8 mg 		
14–18 years 	11 mg 	15 mg 	27 mg 	10 mg
19–50 years 	8 mg 	18 mg 	27 mg 	9 mg
51+ years 	8 mg 	8 mg 		

* Adequate Intake (AI)
Sources of Iron
Food

Lean meat and seafood are the richest dietary sources of heme iron, while nuts, beans, and vegetables contain nonheme iron. Wheat and other flours are often fortified with iron, making bread, cereal, and other grain products good dietary sources of nonheme iron as well. Heme iron has better bioavailability than nonheme iron; in addition, consuming other dietary components with nonheme iron, such as ascorbic acid and phytate, can significantly affect the bioavailability of nonheme iron.

The richest sources of heme iron in the diet include lean meat and seafood [19]. Dietary sources of nonheme iron include nuts, beans, vegetables, and fortified grain products. In the United States, about half of dietary iron comes from bread, cereal, and other grain products [2,3,5]. Breast milk contains highly bioavailable iron, but the amounts found in breast milk are not sufficient to meet the needs of infants older than 4 to 6 months [2,20].

In the United States, Canada, and many other countries, wheat and other flours are fortified with iron [21,22]. Infant formulas are fortified with 12 milligrams (mg) iron per liter [20].

Heme iron has higher bioavailability than nonheme iron, and other dietary components have less effect on the bioavailability of heme than nonheme iron [3,4]. The bioavailability of iron is approximately 14% to 18% from mixed diets that include substantial amounts of meat, seafood, and vitamin C (ascorbic acid, which enhances the bioavailability of nonheme iron) and 5% to 12% from vegetarian diets [2,4]. In addition to ascorbic acid, meat, poultry, and seafood can enhance nonheme iron absorption, whereas phytate (which is present in grains and beans) and certain polyphenols in some nonanimal foods (e.g., cereals, legumes) have the opposite effect [4]. Unlike other inhibitors of iron absorption, calcium might reduce the bioavailability of both nonheme and heme iron. However, the effects of enhancers and inhibitors of iron absorption are attenuated by a typical western diet, so they have little effect on most people’s iron status.

Several food sources of iron are listed in Table 2. Some plant-based foods that are good sources of iron, such as spinach, have low iron bioavailability because they contain iron-absorption inhibitors, such as polyphenols [23,24].
Table 2: Iron Content of Selected Foods [25] Food 	Milligrams (mg)
per serving 	Percent DV*
Breakfast cereals, fortified with 100% of the DV for iron, 1 serving 	18 	100
Oysters, eastern, cooked with moist heat, 3 ounces 	8 	44
White beans, canned, 1 cup 	8 	44
Beef liver, pan fried, 3 ounces 	5 	28
Lentils, boiled and drained, ½ cup 	3 	17
Spinach, boiled and drained, ½ cup 	3 	17
Tofu, firm, ½ cup 	3 	17
Chocolate, dark, 45%–69% cacao solids, 1 ounce 	2 	11
Kidney beans, canned, ½ cup 	2 	11
Sardines, Atlantic, canned in oil, drained solids with bone, 3 ounces 	2 	11
Chickpeas, boiled and drained, ½ cup 	2 	11
Tomatoes, canned, stewed, ½ cup 	2 	11
Beef, braised bottom round, with fat trimmed, 3 ounces 	2 	11
Potato, baked, flesh and skin, 1 medium potato 	2 	11
Cashew nuts, oil roasted, 1 ounce (18 nuts) 	2 	11
Green peas, boiled, ½ cup 	1 	6
Chicken, roasted, meat and skin, 3 ounces 	1 	6
Rice, white, long grain, enriched, parboiled, drained, ½ cup 	1 	6
Bread, whole wheat, 1 slice 	1 	6
Bread, white, 1 slice 	1 	6
Raisins, seedless, ¼ cup 	1 	6
Spaghetti, whole wheat, cooked, 1 cup 	1 	6
Tuna, light, canned in water, 3 ounces 	1 	6
Turkey, roasted, breast meat and skin, 3 ounces 	1 	6
Nuts, pistachio, dry roasted, 1 ounce (49 nuts) 	1 	6
Broccoli, boiled and drained, ½ cup 	1 	6
Egg, hard boiled, 1 large 	1 	6
Rice, brown, long or medium grain, cooked, 1 cup 	1 	6
Cheese, cheddar, 1.5 ounces 	0 	0
Cantaloupe, diced, ½ cup 	0 	0
Mushrooms, white, sliced and stir-fried, ½ cup 	0 	0
Cheese, cottage, 2% milk fat, ½ cup 	0 	0
Milk, 1 cup 	0 	0

* DV = Daily Value. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) developed DVs to help consumers compare the nutrient contents of foods and dietary supplements within the context of a total diet. The DV for iron is 18 mg for adults and children age 4 years and older [26]. FDA requires food labels to list iron content. Foods providing 20% or more of the DV are considered to be high sources of a nutrient, but foods providing lower percentages of the DV also contribute to a healthful diet.

The U.S. Department of Agriculture’s (USDA’s) FoodData Central [25] lists the nutrient content of many foods and provides a comprehensive list of foods containing iron arranged by nutrient content and by food name.
Dietary supplements

Ferrous and ferric iron salts are the most common forms of iron found in dietary supplements, although other forms are also used. The various forms of iron contain different amounts of elemental iron, and certain forms may be more likely to cause gastrointestinal side effects at high doses. In addition, experts recommend taking calcium and iron supplements at different times to avoid potential interference with the absorption of iron.

Iron is available in many dietary supplements. Multivitamin/mineral supplements with iron, especially those designed for women, typically provide 18 mg iron, which is 100% of the Daily Value (DV). Multivitamin/mineral supplements for men or seniors frequently contain less or no iron. Iron-only supplements usually deliver more than the DV, with many providing 65 mg iron (360% of the DV).

Frequently used forms of iron in supplements include ferrous and ferric iron salts, such as ferrous sulfate, ferrous gluconate, ferric citrate, and ferric sulfate [3,27]. Because of its higher solubility, ferrous iron in dietary supplements is more bioavailable than ferric iron [3]. High doses of supplemental iron (45 mg/day or more) may cause gastrointestinal side effects, such as nausea and constipation [5]. Other forms of supplemental iron, such as heme iron polypeptides, carbonyl iron, iron amino-acid chelates, and polysaccharide-iron complexes, might have fewer gastrointestinal side effects than ferrous or ferric salts [27].

The different forms of iron in supplements contain varying amounts of elemental iron. For example, ferrous fumarate is 33% elemental iron by weight, whereas ferrous sulfate is 20% and ferrous gluconate is 12% elemental iron [27]. Fortunately, elemental iron is listed in the Supplement Facts panel, so consumers do not need to calculate the amount of iron supplied by various forms of iron supplements.

Approximately 14% to 18% of Americans use a supplement that contains iron [28,29]. The proportion of people who use supplements that contain iron varies by age and gender, ranging from 6% of children age 12 to 19 years to 60% of women who are lactating and 72% of pregnant women [28,30].

Calcium might interfere with the absorption of iron, although this effect has not been definitively established [4,31]. For this reason, experts suggest that people take individual calcium and iron supplements at different times of the day [32].
Iron Intakes and Status

While most people in the United States obtain adequate amounts of iron from their diets, certain factors, such as age, sex, race, and socioeconomic status, can put people at a higher risk of iron deficiency. At the other end of the spectrum, some people, including individuals with hereditary hemochromatosis, are at risk of obtaining excess iron.

People in the United States usually obtain adequate amounts of iron from their diets, but infants, young children, teenage girls, pregnant women, and premenopausal women are at risk of obtaining insufficient amounts [28,33-35]. The average daily iron intake from foods is 11.5 to 13.7 mg/day in children age 2 to 11 years, 15.1 mg/day in children and teens age 12 to 19 years, and 16.3 to 18.2 mg/day in men and 12.6 to 13.5 mg/day in women older than 19 [28]. The average daily iron intake from foods and supplements is 13.7 to 15.1 mg/day in children age 2 to 11 years, 16.3 mg/day in children and teens age 12 to 19 years, and 19.3 to 20.5 mg/day in men and 17.0 to 18.9 mg/day in women older than 19. The median dietary iron intake in pregnant women is 14.7 mg/day [5].

Rates of iron deficiency vary by race and other sociodemographic factors. Six percent of White and Black toddlers age 1 to 3 years in the United States are iron deficient (defined as at least two abnormal results for the child’s age and gender on transferrin saturation tests, free erythrocyte protoporphyrin tests, and/or serum ferritin tests), compared with 12% of Hispanic toddlers [36]. Deficiency (including IDA) is more common among children and adolescents in food-insecure households than in food-secure households [36,37]. Among pregnant women, iron deficiency (based on depleted iron stores) is more common in Mexican American (23.6%) and non-Hispanic Black women (29.6%) than in non-Hispanic White women (13.9%) [38].

Some groups are at risk of obtaining excess iron. Individuals with hereditary hemochromatosis, which predisposes them to absorb excessive amounts of dietary iron, have an increased risk of iron overload [39]. One study suggests that elderly people are more likely to have chronic positive iron balance and elevated total body iron than iron deficiency. Among 1,106 elderly White adults age 67 to 96 years in the Framingham Heart Study, 13% had high iron stores (serum ferritin levels higher than 300 mcg/L in men and 200 mcg/L in women), of which only 1% was due to chronic disease [40]. The authors did not assess genotypes, so they could not determine whether these results were due to hemochromatosis [40].
Iron Deficiency

There are several stages of iron depletion and deficiency; iron deficiency anemia occurs when the body’s iron stores are exhausted, and hematocrit and levels of hemoglobin decline. People with iron deficiency anemia may experience gastrointestinal disturbances, weakness, fatigue, and difficulty concentrating. The condition may also impair cognitive function, immune function, and body temperature regulation. People with iron deficiency often have other nutrient deficiencies, which can cause other types of anemia or affect the severity of anemia.

Iron deficiency is not uncommon in the United States, especially among young children, women of reproductive age, and pregnant women. Because iron deficiency is associated with poor diet, malabsorptive disorders, and blood loss, people with iron deficiency usually have other nutrient deficiencies [2]. The World Health Organization (WHO) estimates that approximately half of the 1.62 billion cases of anemia worldwide are due to iron deficiency [41]. In developing countries, iron deficiency is often caused by enteropathies and blood loss that are associated with gastrointestinal parasites [2].

Iron depletion and deficiency progresses through several stages [8-10]:

    Mild deficiency or storage iron depletion: Serum ferritin concentrations and levels of iron in bone marrow decrease.
    Marginal deficiency, mild functional deficiency, or iron-deficient erythropoiesis (erythrocyte production): Iron stores are depleted and iron supply to erythropoietic cells and transferrin saturation declines, but hemoglobin levels are usually within the normal range.
    IDA: Iron stores are exhausted; hematocrit and levels of hemoglobin decline; and the resulting microcytic, hypochromic anemia is characterized by small red blood cells with low hemoglobin concentrations.

In 2002, the WHO characterized IDA as one of the 10 leading risk factors for disease around the world [42]. Although iron deficiency is the most common cause of anemia, deficiencies of other micronutrients (e.g., folate, vitamin B12) and other factors (e.g., chronic infection and inflammation) can cause different forms of anemia or contribute to their severity.

The functional deficits that are associated with IDA include gastrointestinal disturbances; weakness; fatigue; difficulty concentrating; and impaired cognitive function, immune function, exercise or work performance, and body temperature regulation [15,43]. In infants and children, IDA can result in psychomotor and cognitive abnormalities that, without treatment, can lead to learning difficulties [2,43]. Some evidence indicates that the effects of deficiencies early in life persist through adulthood [2]. Because iron deficiency is often accompanied by deficiencies in other nutrients, the signs and symptoms of iron deficiency can be difficult to isolate [2].
Groups at Risk of Iron Inadequacy

Certain groups of people are more likely than others to have inadequate iron intakes, including pregnant women, infants and young children, women with heavy menstrual bleeding, and frequent blood donors. People with certain conditions, such as cancer, gastrointestinal disorders, and heart failure, may also have inadequate iron intakes.

The following groups are among those most likely to have inadequate intakes of iron.
Pregnant women

During pregnancy, plasma volume and red cell mass expand as maternal red blood cell production increases to meet the needs of the fetus and placenta [2]. As a result of this expansion, the amount of iron that women need increases during pregnancy. Iron deficiency during pregnancy increases the risk of maternal and infant mortality, premature birth, and low birthweight [44].
Infants and young children

Infants—especially those born preterm or with low birthweight or whose mothers have iron deficiency—are at risk of iron deficiency because of their high iron requirements due to their rapid growth [34,45]. Full-term infants usually have sufficient iron stores and need little if any iron from external sources until they are 4 to 6 months old [2]. However, full-term infants have a risk of becoming iron deficient at 6 to 9 months unless they obtain adequate amounts of solid foods that are rich in bioavailable iron or iron-fortified formula.
Women with heavy menstrual bleeding

Women of reproductive age who have menorrhagia, or abnormally heavy bleeding during menstruation, have an increased risk of iron deficiency. At least 10% of menstruating women are believed to have menorrhagia, but the percentage varies widely depending on the diagnostic criteria used [46-48]. Women with menorrhagia lose significantly more iron per menstrual cycle on average than women with normal menstrual bleeding [49]. Limited evidence suggests that menorrhagia might be responsible for about 33% to 41% of cases of IDA in women of reproductive age [50,51].
Frequent blood donors

Frequent blood donors have an increased risk of iron deficiency [5]. In the United States, adults may donate blood as often as every 8 weeks, which can deplete iron stores. About 25% to 35% of regular blood donors develop iron deficiency [52]. In a study of 2,425 blood donors, men who had given at least three whole-blood donations and women who had given at least two whole-blood donations in the previous year were more than five times as likely to have depleted iron stores as first-time donors [53]. A clinical trial of iron supplementation found that of 215 adults who had donated a unit of blood within the past 3 to 8 days, those randomized to take an iron supplement (37.5 mg/day elemental iron from ferrous gluconate) for 24 weeks recovered their lost hemoglobin and iron in less than half the time of those not given the supplement [52]. At 24 weeks, two-thirds of the donors who did not receive iron supplementation had not recovered the iron had they lost.
People with cancer

Up to 60% of patients with colon cancer have iron deficiency at diagnosis, probably due to chronic blood loss [54]. The prevalence of iron deficiency in patients with other types of cancer ranges from 29% to 46%. The main causes of iron deficiency in people with cancer are anemia of chronic disease (discussed in the Iron and Health section below) and chemotherapy-induced anemia. However, chronic blood loss and deficiencies of other nutrients (due, for example, to cancer-induced anorexia) can exacerbate iron deficiency in this population.
People who have gastrointestinal disorders or have had gastrointestinal surgery

People with certain gastrointestinal disorders (e.g., celiac disease, ulcerative colitis, Crohn’s disease) or who have undergone certain gastrointestinal surgical procedures (e.g., gastrectomy, intestinal resection) have an increased risk of iron deficiency because their disorder or surgery requires dietary restrictions or results in iron malabsorption or blood loss in the gastrointestinal tract [55-57]. The combination of low iron intake and high iron loss can lead to a negative iron balance; reduced production of hemoglobin; or microcytic, hypochromic anemia [58].
People with heart failure

Approximately 60% of patients with chronic heart failure have iron deficiency and 17% have IDA, which might be associated with a higher risk of death in this population [59,60]. Potential causes of iron deficiency in people with heart failure include poor nutrition; malabsorption; defective mobilization of iron stores; cardiac cachexia; and the use of aspirin and oral anticoagulants, which might result in the loss of some blood in the gastrointestinal tract [61].
Iron and Health

This section focuses on the role of iron in IDA in pregnant women, infants, and toddlers as well as in anemia of chronic disease.
Iron deficiency anemia in pregnant women

Iron supplementation has been shown to reduce the risk of iron deficiency anemia in pregnant women and the risk of certain adverse effects in their infants. Accordingly, some professional societies and public health organizations recommend anemia screening and iron supplementation for pregnant women, but not all groups agree that the evidence is sufficient to recommend routine screening and supplementation for asymptomatic pregnant women.

Insufficient iron intakes during pregnancy increase a woman’s risk of IDA [62-65]. Low intakes also increase her infant’s risk of low birthweight, premature birth, low iron stores, and impaired cognitive and behavioral development.

An analysis of 1999–2006 data from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) found that 18% of pregnant women in the United States had iron deficiency [38]. Rates of deficiency were 6.9% among women in the first trimester,14.3% in the second trimester, and 29.7% in the third trimester.

Randomized controlled trials have shown that iron supplementation can prevent IDA in pregnant women and related adverse effects in their infants [66,67]. A Cochrane Review showed that daily supplementation with 9 to 90 mg iron reduced the risk of anemia in pregnant women at term by 70% and of iron deficiency at term by 57% [64]. In the same review, use of daily iron supplements was associated with an 8.4% risk of having a low-birthweight newborn compared to 10.2% with no supplementation. In addition, the mean birthweight was 31 g higher for infants whose mothers took daily iron supplements during pregnancy than for the infants of mothers who did not take iron.

The guidelines from professional societies and public health organizations vary on iron supplementation during pregnancy:

    The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) recommends low-dose iron supplementation (dose not specified) starting in the first trimester to decrease the prevalence of maternal anemia at delivery [68]. It also recommends screening all pregnant women for anemia in the first trimester and again at 24 to 28 weeks gestation and evaluating those who have anemia (defined as hematocrit levels less than 33% in the first and third trimesters and less than 32% in the second trimester) to determine the cause. ACOG states that IDA during pregnancy is associated with increased risks of preterm birth, low birth weight, and perinatal mortality and should be treated with iron supplementation in addition to prenatal vitamins.
    In contrast, the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) has concluded that the current evidence is insufficient to assess the balance of benefits and harms of both screening for iron deficiency and IDA in pregnant women and routinely supplementing them with iron to prevent adverse maternal and infant health outcomes [69]. They note, however, that their recommendation applies to asymptomatic pregnant women. It does not apply to pregnant women who are severely malnourished, have symptoms of iron deficiency or IDA, or have conditions such as sickle cell disease or nutritional deficiencies that may increase iron needs.
    The FNB notes that because the median intake of dietary iron by pregnant women is well below the EAR, pregnant women need iron supplementation [5].
    The Dietary Guidelines for Americans advises that women who are pregnant take an iron supplement when recommended by an obstetrician or other health care provider [19]. It adds that low intakes of iron are a public health concern for pregnant women.

Iron deficiency anemia in infants and toddlers

In infants, iron deficiency anemia can cause adverse cognitive and psychological effects that are potentially irreversible. Studies indicate that iron supplementation or fortification of foods with iron can reduce the risk of iron deficiency in infants and young children, but guidelines from professional societies and public health organizations vary for this population.

Approximately 18% of infants age 6 to 12 months in the United States have inadequate iron intakes, and 8% of toddlers have iron deficiency [36,70]. The prevalence of IDA in U.S. toddlers age 12 to 35 months ranges from 0.9% to 4.4% depending on race or ethnicity and socioeconomic status [20]. Full-term infants typically have adequate iron stores for approximately the first 4 to 6 months, but the risk of iron deficiency in low-birthweight and preterm infants begins at birth because of their low iron stores.

IDA in infancy can lead to adverse cognitive and psychological effects, including delayed attention and social withdrawal; some of these effects might be irreversible [2,20]. In addition, IDA is associated with higher lead concentrations in the blood (although the cause of this is not fully understood), which can increase the risk of neurotoxicity [20].

A Cochrane Review of 26 studies in 2,726 preterm and low-birthweight infants found that enteral iron supplementation (at least 1 mg/kg/day) reduces the risk of iron deficiency, but the long-term effects of supplementation on neurodevelopmental outcomes and growth is not clear [71]. Another Cochrane Review of eight trials in 3,748 children younger than 2 in low-income countries showed that home fortification of semi-solid foods with micronutrient powders containing 12.5 mg to 30 mg elemental iron as ferrous fumarate and 4 to 14 other micronutrients for 2 to 12 months reduced rates of anemia by 31% and of iron deficiency by 51% compared with no intervention or placebo but had no effect on any growth measurements [72].

The guidelines from profesisonal societies and public health organizations vary on iron supplementation for infants and young children:

    The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends that infants less than 12 months of age who are not exclusively or primarily breastfed drink iron-fortified infant formula [17]. Breastfed infants who were born preterm or with a low birthweight should receive 2 to 4 mg/kg/day of iron drops (to a maximum of 15 mg/day) from ages 1 to 12 months. Breastfed infants who receive insufficient iron (less than 1 mg/kg/day) from supplementary foods by age 6 months should receive 1 mg/kg/day of iron drops. The CDC also recommends that infants and preschool children at high risk for IDA (e.g., children from low-income families, migrant children) be screened between age 9 to 12 months, 6 months later, and annually from age 2 to 5 years. Treatment for IDA begins with 3 mg/kg/day of iron drops given between meals.
    The American Academy of Pediatrics recommends 1 mg/kg daily iron supplementation for exclusively or primarily breastfed full-term infants from age 4 months until the infants begin eating iron-containing complementary foods, such as iron-fortified cereals [20]. Standard infant formulas that contain 10 to 12 mg/L of iron can meet the iron needs of infants for the first year of life. The Academy recommends 2 mg/kg/day iron supplementation for preterm infants age 1 to 12 months who are fed breast milk.
    The WHO recommends universal supplementation with 2 mg/kg/day of iron in children age 6 to 23 months whose diet does not include foods fortified with iron or who live in regions (e.g., developing countries) where anemia prevalence is higher than 40% [44].
    In a recommendation statement issued in 2015, the USPSTF concluded that the available evidence is insufficient to recommend for or against routine screening for IDA in children age 6 to 24 months who live in the United States and who are asymptomatic for IDA [73]. It added that this recommendation does not apply to severely malnourished children or children who were born prematurely or with low birthweight. Earlier, in 2006, the USPSTF stated that although it found insufficient evidence to recommend routine iron supplementation in asymptomatic infants at average risk of IDA, it did recommend routine iron supplements for children age 6 to 12 months who are at increased risk of IDA (e.g., those who were premature or low birthweight) [74]. The USPSTF's 2015 statement notes that its current recommendation is limited to screening because the widespread use of iron-fortified foods in the United States (including infant formulas and cereals) would likely limit the impact of iron supplementation prescribed by physicians [73].

Some studies have suggested that iron supplementation in young children living in areas where malaria is endemic could increase their risk of malaria [75,76]. However, a Cochrane Review of 33 trials in 13,114 children showed that intermittent supplementation does not appear to have this effect [77]. The WHO therefore recommends 6-month supplementation cycles as follows: children age 24 to 59 months should receive 25 mg iron and those age 5 to 12 years should receive 45 mg every week for 3 months, followed by 3 months of no supplementation [75]. The WHO recommends providing these supplements in malaria-endemic areas in conjunction with measures to prevent, diagnose, and treat malaria.
Anemia of chronic disease

Anemia of chronic disease is caused by certain inflammatory, infectious, and neoplastic diseases that disrupt iron homeostasis and limit the amount of iron that is available for erythropoiesis. Treating anemia of chronic disease is usually a matter of treating the underlying disease, but in some cases, patients may receive iron supplementation or erythropoiesis-stimulating agents. However, using iron supplementation to treat this condition remains controversial due to the risk of infection and cardiovascular events.

Certain inflammatory, infectious, and neoplastic diseases (e.g., rheumatoid arthritis, inflammatory bowel disease, hematologic malignancies) can cause anemia of chronic disease, also known as anemia of inflammation [2,78]. Anemia of chronic disease is the second most common type of anemia after IDA [79]. In people with anemia of chronic disease, inflammatory cytokines upregulate the hormone hepcidin. As a result, iron homeostasis is disrupted and iron is diverted from the circulation to storage sites, limiting the amount of iron available for erythropoiesis.

Anemia of chronic disease is usually mild to moderate (hemoglobin levels 8–9.5 g/dL) and is associated with low counts of erythrocytes and decreased erythropoiesis [78]. The condition can be difficult to diagnose; although low serum ferritin levels indicate iron deficiency, these levels tend to be higher in patients with infection or inflammation [80].

The clinical implications of iron deficiency in people with chronic diseases are not clear. Even mild anemia of chronic disease is associated with an increased risk of hospitalization and mortality in older people [81]. Two prospective observational studies found that iron deficiency in patients with objectively measured heart failure was associated with an increased risk of heart transplantation and death, and this association was independent of other well-established prognostic factors for poor outcomes, including anemia [82,83]. However, an analysis of NHANES data from 574 adults with self-reported heart failure found no association between iron deficiency and all-cause or cardiovascular mortality [60].

The main therapy for anemia of chronic disease is treatment of the underlying disease [79]. But when such treatment is not possible, iron supplementation and/or erythropoiesis-stimulating agents (ESAs) are sometimes used. The use of iron supplements—whether oral, intravenous, or parenteral—in this setting is controversial because they might increase the risk of infection and cardiovascular events and could cause tissue damage [79].

Only a few small studies have evaluated the benefits of oral iron supplementation alone or in combination with ESAs to treat anemia of chronic disease. For example, a prospective observational study in 132 patients with anemia and chronic kidney disease who were not on dialysis or ESAs found that oral supplements (130 mg/day elemental iron from ferrous sulfate twice daily) for 1 year resulted in a decline in hemoglobin of only 0.13 g/dL compared with a decline of 0.46 g/dL in the placebo group [76,84]. In a randomized trial of 100 patients with cancer-related anemia, taking oral iron supplements (equivalent to 200 mg/day elemental iron, form of iron not specified) once per week with an ESA resulted in a mean increase of 2.4 g/dL hemoglobin after 24 weeks compared with taking only oral supplements [85]. Iron administered parentally increases hemoglobin levels to a greater extent and is associated with fewer side effects than oral iron supplementation in patients with anemia of chronic disease [86].
Health Risks from Excessive Iron

The risk of iron overload from dietary sources of iron is low among adults who have normal intestinal function, but high doses of iron supplements can cause a range of gastrointestinal effects. With extremely high doses, these effects can be severe, including corrosive necrosis of the intestine, multisystem organ failure, and even death. The Tolerable Upper Intake Level for iron is 45 mg for adults, and it ranges from 40 mg to 45 mg for infants, children, and adolescents, depending on age.

Adults with normal intestinal function have very little risk of iron overload from dietary sources of iron [2]. However, supplements containing 25 mg iron or more can reduce zinc absorption and plasma zinc concentrations [3,87,88]. High-dose iron supplements can also cause gastrointestinal effects, including gastric upset, constipation, nausea, abdominal pain, vomiting, and diarrhea [5,89]. Taking iron supplements with food can help minimize these adverse effects. Case reports, some of which involved doses of 130 mg iron, suggest that some people develop even more serious gastrointestinal effects, including gastritis and gastric lesions (along with iron deposits in the gastric mucosa in some cases) [90-93].

Acute intakes of more than 20 mg/kg iron (about 1,365 mg iron for a person weighing 150 pounds [lb]) from supplements or medicines can lead to corrosive necrosis of the intestine, which might lead to fluid and blood loss, shock, tissue damage, and organ failure, especially if food is not taken at the same time as the iron [89]. In severe cases (e.g., one-time ingestions of 60 mg/kg, or about 4,090 mg iron for a 150-lb person), overdoses of iron can lead to multisystem organ failure, coma, convulsions, and even death [27,94].

Between 1983 and 2000, at least 43 U.S. children died from ingesting supplements containing high doses of iron (36–443 mg iron/kg body weight) [27]. Accidental ingestion of iron supplements caused about a third of poisoning deaths among children reported in the United States between 1983 and 1991.

In 1997, FDA began requiring oral supplements containing more than 30 mg elemental iron per dose to be sold in single-dose packaging with strong warning labels. At the same time, many manufacturers voluntarily replaced the sugar coating on iron tablets with film coatings. Between 1998 and 2002, only one child death due to ingesting an iron-containing tablet was reported [27]. As a result of a court decision, FDA removed its single-dose packaging requirement for iron supplements in 2003 [95]. FDA currently requires that iron-containing dietary supplements sold in solid form (e.g., tablets or capsules but not powders) carry the following label statement: “WARNING: Accidental overdose of iron-containing products is a leading cause of fatal poisoning in children under 6. Keep this product out of reach of children. In case of accidental overdose, call a doctor or poison control center immediately” [96]. In addition, since 1978, the Consumer Product Safety Commission has required manufacturers to package dietary supplements that contain 250 mg or more elemental iron per container in child-resistant bottles or packaging to prevent accidental poisoning [97,98].

Hemochromatosis, a disease caused by a mutation in the hemochromatosis (HFE) gene, is associated with an excessive buildup of iron in the body [3,39,99]. About 1 in 10 Whites carry the most common HFE mutation (C282Y), but only 4.4 Whites per 1,000 are homozygous for the mutation and have hemochromatosis [100]. The condition is much less common in other ethnic groups. Without treatment by periodic chelation or phlebotomy, people with hereditary hemochromatosis typically develop signs of iron toxicity by their 30s [3]. These effects can include liver cirrhosis, hepatocellular carcinoma, heart disease, and impaired pancreatic function. The American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases recommends that treatment of hemochromatosis include the avoidance of iron and vitamin C supplements [39].

The FNB has established ULs for iron from food and supplements based on the amounts of iron that are associated with gastrointestinal effects following supplemental intakes of iron salts (see Table 3). The ULs apply to healthy infants, children, and adults. Physicians sometimes prescribe intakes higher than the UL, such as when people with IDA need higher doses to replenish their iron stores [5].
Table 3: Tolerable Upper Intake Levels (ULs) for Iron [5] Age 	Male 	Female 	Pregnancy 	Lactation
0–6 months 	40 mg 	40 mg 		
7–12 months 	40 mg 	40 mg 		
1–3 years 	40 mg 	40 mg 		
4–8 years 	40 mg 	40 mg 		
9–13 years 	40 mg 	40 mg 		
14–18 years 	45 mg 	45 mg 	45 mg 	45 mg
19–50 years 	45 mg 	45 mg 	45 mg 	45 mg
51+ years 	45 mg 	45 mg 		
 
Interactions with Medications

Iron supplements may interact with medications, including levodopa and levothyroxine. In addition, proton pump inhibitors can potentially reduce iron absorption.

Iron can interact with certain medications, and some medications can have an adverse effect on iron levels. A few examples are provided below. Individuals taking these and other medications on a regular basis should discuss their iron status with their health care providers.
Levodopa

Some evidence indicates that in healthy people, iron supplements reduce the absorption of levodopa (found in Sinemet and Stalevo), used to treat Parkinson’s disease and restless leg syndrome, possibly through chelation [101-103]. In the United States, the labels for levodopa warn that iron-containing dietary supplements might reduce the amount of levodopa available to the body and, thus, diminish its clinical effectiveness [104,105].
Levothyroxine

Levothyroxine (Levothroid, Levoxyl, Synthroid, Tirosint, and Unithroid) is used to treat hypothyroidism, goiter, and thyroid cancer. The simultaneous ingestion of iron and levothyroxine can result in clinically significant reductions in levothyroxine efficacy in some patients [106]. The labels for some of these products [107,108] warn that iron supplements can reduce the absorption of levothyroxine tablets and advise against administering levothyroxine within 4 hours of iron supplements.
Proton pump inhibitors

Gastric acid plays an important role in the absorption of nonheme iron from the diet. Because proton pump inhibitors, such as lansoprazole (Prevacid) and omeprazole (Prilosec), reduce the acidity of stomach contents, they can reduce iron absorption [3]. Treatment with proton pump inhibitors for up to 10 years is not associated with iron depletion or anemia in people with normal iron stores [109] but patients with iron deficiency taking proton pump inhibitors can have suboptimal responses to iron supplementation [110].
Iron and Healthful Diets

In general, a person’s nutritional needs should be met primarily through the diet, including fortified foods. Dietary supplements may be useful in cases where it is not possible to meet the needs for specific nutrients through food alone, especially during certain life stages. The Dietary Guidelines for Americans offers a general description of healthy dietary patterns.

The federal government's 2020–2025 Dietary Guidelines for Americans notes that "Because foods provide an array of nutrients and other components that have benefits for health, nutritional needs should be met primarily through foods ...In some cases, fortified foods and dietary supplements are useful when it is not possible otherwise to meet needs for one or more nutrients (e.g., during specific life stages such as pregnancy)."

For more information about building a healthy dietary pattern, refer to the Dietary Guidelines for Americans and the USDA's MyPlate.

The Dietary Guidelines for Americans describes a healthy dietary pattern as one that

    Includes a variety of vegetables; fruits; grains (at least half whole grains); fat-free and low-fat milk, yogurt, and cheese; and oils.
        Many ready-to-eat breakfast cereals are fortified with iron, and some fruits and vegetables contain iron.
    Includes a variety of protein-rich foods, such as lean meats, poultry, eggs, seafood, beans, peas, lentils, nuts, seeds, and soy products.
        Oysters and beef liver have high amounts of iron. Beef, cashews, chickpeas, and sardines are good sources of iron. Chicken, tuna, and eggs contain iron.
    Limits foods and beverages that are higher in added sugars, saturated fat, and sodium.
    Limits alcoholic beverages.
    Stays within your daily calorie needs.

References

    Wessling-Resnick M. Iron. In: Ross AC, Caballero B, Cousins RJ, Tucker KL, Ziegler RG, eds. Modern Nutrition in Health and Disease. 11th ed. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2014:176-88.
    Aggett PJ. Iron. In: Erdman JW, Macdonald IA, Zeisel SH, eds. Present Knowledge in Nutrition. 10th ed. Washington, DC: Wiley-Blackwell; 2012:506-20.
    Murray-Kolbe LE, Beard J. Iron. In: Coates PM, Betz JM, Blackman MR, et al., eds. Encyclopedia of Dietary Supplements. 2nd ed. London and New York: Informa Healthcare; 2010:432-8.
    Hurrell R, Egli I. Iron bioavailability and dietary reference values. Am J Clin Nutr 2010;91:1461S-7S. [PubMed abstract]
    Institute of Medicine. Food and Nutrition Board. Dietary Reference Intakes for Vitamin A, Vitamin K, Arsenic, Boron, Chromium, Copper, Iodine, Iron, Manganese, Molybdenum, Nickel, Silicon, Vanadium, and Zinc : a Report of the Panel on Micronutrients. Washington, DC: National Academy Press; 2001.
    Drakesmith H, Prentice AM. Hepcidin and the Iron-Infection Axis. Science 2012;338:768-72. [PubMed abstract]
    Taylor CL, Brannon PM. Introduction to workshop on iron screening and supplementation in iron-replete pregnant women and young children. Am J Clin Nutr. 2017 Dec;106(Suppl 6):1547S-54S. [PubMed abstract]
    Powers JM, Buchanan GR. Disorders of iron metabolism: New diagnostic and treatment approaches to iron deficiency. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am. 2019 Jun;33(3):393-408. [PubMed abstract]
    Lynch S, Pfeiffer CM, Georgieff MK, Brittenham G, Fairweather-Tait S, Hurrell RF, et al. Biomarkers of Nutrition for Development (BOND)-Iron Review. J Nutr. 2018 Jun 1;148(suppl 1):1001S-67S. [PubMed abstract]
    World Health Organization. Report: Priorities in the Assessment of Vitamin A and Iron Status in Populations, Panama City, Panama, 15-17 September 2010. Geneva; 2012.
    DeLoughery TG. Microcytic anemia. N Engl J Med. 2014 Oct 2;371(14):1324-31. [PubMed abstract]
    DeLoughery TG. Iron deficiency anemia. Med Clin North Am. 2017 Mar;101(2):319-32. doi: 10.1016/j.mcna.2016.09.004. [PubMed abstract]
    Short MW, Domagalski JE. Iron deficiency anemia: evaluation and management. Am Fam Physician. 2013 Jan 15;87(2):98-104. [PubMed abstract]
    Gibson RS. Assessment of Iron Status. In: Principles of Nutritional Assessment. 2nd ed. New York: Oxford University Press; 2005:443-76.
    Camaschella C. Iron-deficiency anemia. N Engl J Med. 2015 May 7;372(19):1832-43. [PubMed abstract]
    Suchdev PS, Williams AM, Mei Z, Flores-Ayala R, Pasricha SR, Rogers LM, Namaste SM. Assessment of iron status in settings of inflammation: challenges and potential approaches. Am J Clin Nutr. 2017 Dec;106(Suppl 6):1626S-33S. [PubMed abstract]
    Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Recommendations to prevent and control iron deficiency in the United States. MMWR Recomm Rep 1998;47:1-29. [PubMed abstract]
    MedlinePlus [Internet]. Bethesda (MD): National Library of Medicine (US). Hematocrit.
    2020-2025 Dietary Guidelines for Americans. 9th Edition. December 2020.
    Baker RD, Greer FR. Diagnosis and prevention of iron deficiency and iron-deficiency anemia in infants and young children (0-3 years of age). Pediatrics 2010;126:1040-50. [PubMed abstract]
    Whittaker P, Tufaro PR, Rader JI. Iron and folate in fortified cereals. J Am Coll Nutr 2001;20:247-54. [PubMed abstract]
    Flour Fortification Initiative. Country Profiles.
    Rutzke CJ, Glahn RP, Rutzke MA, Welch RM, Langhans RW, Albright LD, et al. Bioavailability of iron from spinach using an in vitro/human Caco-2 cell bioassay model. Habitation 2004;10:7-14. [PubMed abstract]
    Gillooly M, Bothwell TH, Torrance JD, MacPhail AP, Derman DP, Bezwoda WR, et al. The effects of organic acids, phytates and polyphenols on the absorption of iron from vegetables. Br J Nutr 1983;49:331-42. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service. FoodData Central, 2019.
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Food Labeling: Revision of the Nutrition and Supplement Facts Labels. 2016.
    Manoguerra AS, Erdman AR, Booze LL, Christianson G, Wax PM, Scharman EJ, et al. Iron ingestion: an evidence-based consensus guideline for out-of-hospital management. Clin Toxicol (Phila) 2005;43:553-70. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service. What We Eat in America, 2009-2010. 2012.
    Bailey RL, Gahche JJ, Lentino CV, Dwyer JT, Engel JS, Thomas PR, et al. Dietary supplement use in the United States, 2003-2006. J Nutr 2011;141:261-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Cogswell ME, Kettel-Khan L, Ramakrishnan U. Iron supplement use among women in the United States: science, policy and practice. J Nutr 2003;133:1974S-7S. [PubMed abstract]
    Lonnerdal B. Calcium and iron absorption--mechanisms and public health relevance. Int J Vitam Nutr Res 2010;80:293-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Lynch SR. The effect of calcium on iron absorption. Nutr Res Rev 2000;13:141-58. [PubMed abstract]
    Blanck HM, Cogswell ME, Gillespie C, Reyes M. Iron supplement use and iron status among US adults: results from the third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. Am J Clin Nutr 2005;82:1024-31. [PubMed abstract]
    Black MM, Quigg AM, Hurley KM, Pepper MR. Iron deficiency and iron-deficiency anemia in the first two years of life: strategies to prevent loss of developmental potential. Nutr Rev 2011;69 Suppl 1:S64-70. [PubMed abstract]
    Halterman JS, Kaczorowski JM, Aligne CA, Auinger P, Szilagyi PG. Iron deficiency and cognitive achievement among school-aged children and adolescents in the United States. Pediatrics 2001;107:1381-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Brotanek JM, Gosz J, Weitzman M, Flores G. Iron deficiency in early childhood in the United States: risk factors and racial/ethnic disparities. Pediatrics 2007;120:568-75. [PubMed abstract]
    Eicher-Miller HA, Mason AC, Weaver CM, McCabe GP, Boushey CJ. Food insecurity is associated with iron deficiency anemia in US adolescents. Am J Clin Nutr 2009;90:1358-71. [PubMed abstract]
    Mei Z, Cogswell ME, Looker AC, Pfeiffer CM, Cusick SE, Lacher DA, et al. Assessment of iron status in US pregnant women from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES), 1999-2006. Am J Clin Nutr 2011;93:1312-20. [PubMed abstract]
    Bacon BR, Adams PC, Kowdley KV, Powell LW, Tavill AS. Diagnosis and management of hemochromatosis: 2011 practice guideline by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases. Hepatology 2011;54:328-43. [PubMed abstract]
    Fleming DJ, Jacques PF, Tucker KL, Massaro JM, D'Agostino RB, Sr., Wilson PW, et al. Iron status of the free-living, elderly Framingham Heart Study cohort: an iron-replete population with a high prevalence of elevated iron stores. Am J Clin Nutr 2001;73:638-46. [PubMed abstract]
    World Health Organization. Worldwide Prevalence of Anaemia 1993–2005: WHO Global Database on Anaemia. World Health Organization, 2008.
    World Health Organization. The World Health Report. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2002.
    Clark SF. Iron Deficiency Anemia. Nutr Clin Pract 2008;23:128-41. [PubMed abstract]
    World Health Organization. Iron Deficiency Anaemia: Assessment, Prevention, and Control. World Health Organization, 2001.
    Domellöf M. Iron requirements in infancy. Ann Nutr Metab 2011;59:59-63. [PubMed abstract]
    Matthews ML. Abnormal uterine bleeding in reproductive-aged women. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am 2015;42:103-15. 
      [PubMed abstract]
    Bitzer J, Heikinheimo O, Nelson AL, Calaf-Alsina J, Fraser IS. Medical management of heavy menstrual bleeding: a comprehensive review of the literature. Obstet Gynecol Surv 2015;70:115-30. [PubMed abstract]
    El-Hemaidi I, Gharaibeh A, Shehata H. Menorrhagia and bleeding disorders. Curr Opin Obstet Gynecol 2007;19:513-20. [PubMed abstract]
    Napolitano M, Dolce A, Celenza G, Grandone E, Perilli MG, Siragusa S, et al. Iron-dependent erythropoiesis in women with excessive menstrual blood losses and women with normal menses. Ann Hematol 2014;93:557-63. [PubMed abstract]
    Vannella L, Aloe Spiriti MA, Cozza G, Tardella L, Monarca B, Cuteri A, et al. Benefit of concomitant gastrointestinal and gynaecological evaluation in premenopausal women with iron deficiency anaemia. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2008;28:422-30. [PubMed abstract]
    Philipp CS, Faiz A, Dowling N, Dilley A, Michaels LA, Ayers C, et al. Age and the prevalence of bleeding disorders in women with menorrhagia. Obstet Gynecol 2005;105:61-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Kiss JE, Brambilla D, Glynn SA, Mast AE, Spencer BR, Stone M, et al. Oral iron supplementation after blood donation: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2015;313:575-83. [PubMed abstract]
    Cable RG, Glynn SA, Kiss JE, Mast AE, Steele WR, Murphy EL, et al. Iron deficiency in blood donors: analysis of enrollment data from the REDS-II Donor Iron Status Evaluation (RISE) study. Transfusion 2011;51:511-22. [PubMed abstract]
    Aapro M, Osterborg A, Gascon P, Ludwig H, Beguin Y. Prevalence and management of cancer-related anaemia, iron deficiency and the specific role of i.v. iron. Ann Oncol 2012;23:1954-62. [PubMed abstract]
    Bayraktar UD, Bayraktar S. Treatment of iron deficiency anemia associated with gastrointestinal tract diseases. World J Gastroenterol 2010;16:2720-5. [PubMed abstract]
    Gasche C, Berstad A, Befrits R, Beglinger C, Dignass A, Erichsen K, et al. Guidelines on the diagnosis and management of iron deficiency and anemia in inflammatory bowel diseases. Inflamm Bowel Dis 2007;13:1545-53. [PubMed abstract]
    Bermejo F, Garcia-Lopez S. A guide to diagnosis of iron deficiency and iron deficiency anemia in digestive diseases. World J Gastroenterol 2009;15:4638-43. [PubMed abstract]
    Kulnigg S, Gasche C. Systematic review: managing anaemia in Crohn's disease. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2006;24:1507-23. [PubMed abstract]
    Groenveld HF, Januzzi JL, Damman K, van Wijngaarden J, Hillege HL, van Veldhuisen DJ, et al. Anemia and mortality in heart failure patients a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Am Coll Cardiol 2008;52:818-27. [PubMed abstract]
    Parikh A, Natarajan S, Lipsitz SR, Katz SD. Iron deficiency in community-dwelling US adults with self-reported heart failure in the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey III: prevalence and associations with anemia and inflammation. Circ Heart Fail 2011;4:599-606. [PubMed abstract]
    Lipsic E, van der Meer P. Erythropoietin, iron, or both in heart failure: FAIR-HF in perspective. Eur J Heart Fail 2010;12:104-5. [PubMed abstract]
    Milman N. Iron in pregnancy: How do we secure an appropriate iron status in the mother and child? Ann Nutr Metab 2011;59:50-4. [PubMed abstract]
    Pavord S, Myers B, Robinson S, Allard S, Strong J, Oppenheimer C. UK guidelines on the management of iron deficiency in pregnancy. Br J Haematol 2012;156:588-600. [PubMed abstract]
    Pena-Rosas JP, De-Regil LM, Dowswell T, Viteri FE. Daily oral iron supplementation during pregnancy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2012;12:CD004736. [PubMed abstract]
    Scholl TO. Maternal iron status: relation to fetal growth, length of gestation, and iron endowment of the neonate. Nutr Rev 2011;69 Suppl 1:S23-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Makrides M, Crowther CA, Gibson RA, Gibson RS, Skeaff CM. Efficacy and tolerability of low-dose iron supplements during pregnancy: a randomized controlled trial. Am J Clin Nutr 2003;78:145-53. [PubMed abstract]
    Cogswell ME, Parvanta I, Ickes L, Yip R, Brittenham GM. Iron supplementation during pregnancy, anemia, and birth weight: a randomized controlled trial. Am J Clin Nutr 2003;78:773-81. [PubMed abstract]
    The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Anemia in Pregnancy: ACOG Practice Bulletin, Number 233. Obstet Gynecol 2021;138(2):e55-e64. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Screening and Supplementation for Iron Deficiency and Iron Deficiency Anemia During Pregnancy: US Preventive Services Task Force Recommendation Statement. JAMA; 2024. [PubMed abstract]
    Bailey RL, Catellier DJ, Jun S, Dwyer JT, Jacquier EF, et al. Total Usual Nutrient Intakes of US Children (Under 48 Months): Findings from the Feeding Infants and Toddlers Study (FITS) 2016. J Nutr 2018;148(9S):1557S-66S. [PubMed abstract]
    Mills RJ, Davies MW. Enteral iron supplementation in preterm and low birth weight infants. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2012;3:CD005095. [PubMed abstract]
    De-Regil LM, Suchdev PS, Vist GE, Walleser S, Pena-Rosas JP. Home fortification of foods with multiple micronutrient powders for health and nutrition in children under two years of age (review). Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2011:CD008959. [PubMed abstract]
    Siu AL, on behalf of the US Preventive Services Task Force. Screening for iron deficiency anemia in young children: USPSTF recommendation statement. Pediatrics 2015;136:746-52. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Screening for Iron Deficiency Anemia—Including Iron Supplementation for Children and Pregnant Women: Recommendation Statementexternal. Publication No. AHRQ 06-058., 2006.
    World Health Organization. Guideline: Intermittent Iron Supplementation in Preschool and School-age Children. Geneva; 2011. [PubMed abstract]
    Sazawal S, Black RE, Ramsan M, Chwaya HM, Stoltzfus RJ, Dutta A, et al. Effects of routine prophylactic supplementation with iron and folic acid on admission to hospital and mortality in preschool children in a high malaria transmission setting: community-based, randomised, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet 2006;367:133-43. [PubMed abstract]
    De-Regil LM, Jefferds ME, Sylvetsky AC, Dowswell T. Intermittent iron supplementation for improving nutrition and development in children under 12 years of age. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2011:CD009085. [PubMed abstract]
    Cullis JO. Diagnosis and management of anaemia of chronic disease: current status. Br J Haematol 2011;154:289-300. [PubMed abstract]
    Weiss G, Goodnough LT. Anemia of chronic disease. N Engl J Med 2005;352:1011-23. [PubMed abstract]
    Thurnham DI, McCabe LD, Haldar S, Wieringa FT, Northrop-Clewes CA, McCabe GP. Adjusting plasma ferritin concentrations to remove the effects of subclinical inflammation in the assessment of iron deficiency: a meta-analysis. Am J Clin Nutr 2010;92:546-55. [PubMed abstract]
    Riva E, Tettamanti M, Mosconi P, Apolone G, Gandini F, Nobili A, et al. Association of mild anemia with hospitalization and mortality in the elderly: the Health and Anemia population-based study. Haematologica 2009;94:22-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Jankowska EA, Rozentryt P, Witkowska A, Nowak J, Hartmann O, Ponikowska B, et al. Iron deficiency: an ominous sign in patients with systolic chronic heart failure. Eur Heart J 2010;31:1872-80. [PubMed abstract]
    Klip IT, Comin-Colet J, Voors AA, Ponikowski P, Enjuanes C, Banasiak W, et al. Iron deficiency in chronic heart failure: An international pooled analysis. Am Heart J 2013;165:575-82 e3. [PubMed abstract]
    Kim SM, Lee CH, Oh YK, Joo KW, Kim YS, Kim S, et al. The effects of oral iron supplementation on the progression of anemia and renal dysfunction in patients with chronic kidney disease. Clin Nephrol 2011;75:472-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Mystakidou K, Kalaidopoulou O, Katsouda E, Parpa E, Kouskouni E, Chondros C, et al. Evaluation of epoetin supplemented with oral iron in patients with solid malignancies and chronic anemia not receiving anticancer treatment. Anticancer Res 2005;25:3495-500. [PubMed abstract]
    Cavill I, Auerbach M, Bailie GR, Barrett-Lee P, Beguin Y, Kaltwasser P, et al. Iron and the anaemia of chronic disease: a review and strategic recommendations. Curr Med Res Opin 2006;22:731-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Solomons NW. Competitive interaction of iron and zinc in the diet: consequences for human nutrition. J Nutr 1986;116:927-35. [PubMed abstract]
    Whittaker P. Iron and zinc interactions in humans. Am J Clin Nutr 1998;68:442S-6S. [PubMed abstract]
    Aggett PJ. Iron. In: Marriott BP, Birt DF, Stallings VA, Yates AA, eds. Present Knowledge in Nutrition. 11th ed. Cambridge, MA: Elsevier; 2020:375-92.
    Bryce K, Hawthorne M, Ewing I. Unusual gastric lesion in an iron-deficient patient. Gut. 2019;68:2141-78. [PubMed abstract]
    Hashash JG, Proksell S, Kuan SF, Behari J. Iron pill-induced gastritis. ACG Case Rep J. 2013;1:13-5. [PubMed abstract]
    Meliţ LE, Mărginean CO, Mocanu S, Mărginean MO. A rare case of iron-pill induced gastritis in a female teenager: A case report and a review of the literature. Medicine (Baltimore). 2017;96:e7550. [PubMed abstract]
    Motwani K, Rubin J, Yfantis H, Willard M. Iron pill induced gastritis causing severe anemia. Clin J Gastroenterol. 2020;13:732-5. [PubMed abstract]
    Chang TP, Rangan C. Iron poisoning: a literature-based review of epidemiology, diagnosis, and management. Pediatr Emerg Care 2011;27:978-85. [PubMed abstract]
    Food and Drug Administration. Iron-Containing Supplements and Drugs; Label Warning Statements and Unit-Dose Packaging Requirements; Removal of Regulations for Unit-Dose Packaging Requirements for Dietary Supplements and Drugs. 2003.
    Code of Federal Regulations. Title 21 (Food and Drugs), Section 101.17 (Food labeling warning, notice, and safe handling statements).
    Consumer Product Safety Commission. Poison Prevention Packaging: A Guide For Healthcare Professionals. 2005.
    Substances Requiring Special Packaging. 16 CFR 1700.4. 1973.
    Fleming RE, Ponka P. Iron Overload in human disease. N Engl J Med 2012;366:348-59. [PubMed abstract]
    Whitlock EP, Garlitz BA, Harris EL, Beil TL, Smith PR. Screening for hereditary hemochromatosis: a systematic review for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Ann Intern Med 2006;145:209-23. [PubMed abstract]
    Campbell NR, Hasinoff B. Ferrous sulfate reduces levodopa bioavailability: chelation as a possible mechanism. Clin Pharmacol Ther 1989;45:220-5. [PubMed abstract]
    Campbell RR, Hasinoff B, Chernenko G, Barrowman J, Campbell NR. The effect of ferrous sulfate and pH on L-dopa absorption. Can J Physiol Pharmacol 1990;68:603-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Greene RJ, Hall AD, Hider RC. The interaction of orally administered iron with levodopa and methyldopa therapy. J Pharm Pharmacol 1990;42:502-4. [PubMed abstract]
    Novartis. Stalevo Package Insert. 2010.
    Merck & Co. I. Sinemet Package Insert. 2011.
    Campbell NR, Hasinoff BB, Stalts H, Rao B, Wong NC. Ferrous sulfate reduces thyroxine efficacy in patients with hypothyroidism. Ann Intern Med 1992;117:1010-3. [PubMed abstract]
    Forest Laboratories I. Levothroid Package Insert. 2011.
    Abbvie Inc. Synthroid Package Insert. 2012.
    Stewart CA, Termanini B, Sutliff VE, Serrano J, Yu F, Gibril F, et al. Iron absorption in patients with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome treated with long-term gastric acid antisecretory therapy. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 1998;12:83-98. [PubMed abstract]
    Ajmera AV, Shastri GS, Gajera MJ, Judge TA. Suboptimal response to ferrous sulfate in iron-deficient patients taking omeprazole. Am J Ther 2012;19:185-9. [PubMed abstract]

Disclaimer

This fact sheet by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Office of Dietary Supplements (ODS) provides information that should not take the place of medical advice. We encourage you to talk to your health care providers (doctor, registered dietitian, pharmacist, etc.) about your interest in, questions about, or use of dietary supplements and what may be best for your overall health. Any mention in this publication of a specific product or service, or recommendation from an organization or professional society, does not represent an endorsement by ODS of that product, service, or expert advice.

Updated: September 4, 2025


 Magnesium: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals (original version)
Magnesium: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals
Table of Contents

    Introduction
    Assessing magnesium status
    Recommended Intakes
    Sources of Magnesium
    Magnesium Intakes and Status
    Magnesium Deficiency
    Groups at Risk of Magnesium Inadequacy
    Magnesium and Health
    Health Risks from Excessive Magnesium
    Interactions with Medications
    Magnesium and Healthful Diets
    References
    Disclaimer

Introduction

Magnesium, an abundant mineral in the body, is naturally present in many foods, added to other food products, available as a dietary supplement, and present in some medicines (e.g., antacids, laxatives). Magnesium is a cofactor in more than 300 enzyme systems that regulate diverse biochemical reactions in the body, including protein synthesis, muscle and nerve function, blood glucose control, and blood pressure regulation [1-3]. Magnesium is required for energy production, oxidative phosphorylation, and glycolysis. It contributes to the structural development of bone and is required for the synthesis of DNA, RNA, and the antioxidant glutathione. Magnesium also plays a role in the active transport of calcium and potassium ions across cell membranes, a process that is important to nerve impulse conduction, muscle contraction, and normal heart rhythm [3].

An adult body contains approximately 25 grams magnesium, with 50% to 60% present in the bones and most of the rest in soft tissues [4]. Less than 1% of total magnesium is in blood serum, and these levels are kept under tight control. Normal serum magnesium concentrations range between 0.75 and 0.95 millimoles/liter(mmol/L) [1,5]. Hypomagnesemia is defined as a serum magnesium level less than 0.75 mmol/L [6]. Magnesium homeostasis is largely controlled by the kidneys, which typically excrete about 120 milligrams (mg) magnesium into the urine each day [2]. Urinary excretion is reduced when magnesium status is low [1].
Assessing magnesium status

Because most of the magnesium in the body is found inside cells or in bone, it is difficult to assess magnesium status. Measuring serum magnesium concentration is the most commonly used method for assessment, but serum levels do not accurately reflect total body magnesium levels or concentrations in specific tissues. Comprehensively evaluating magnesium status may require the use of both laboratory tests and a clinical assessment.

Assessing magnesium status is difficult because most magnesium is inside cells or in bone [3]. The most commonly used and readily available method for assessing magnesium status is measuring serum magnesium concentration, even though serum levels have little correlation with total body magnesium levels or concentrations in specific tissues [6]. Other methods for assessing magnesium status include measuring magnesium concentrations in erythrocytes, saliva, and urine; measuring ionized magnesium concentrations in blood, plasma, or serum; and conducting a magnesium-loading (or tolerance) test. No single method is considered satisfactory [7]. Some experts [4] but not others [3] consider the tolerance test (in which urinary magnesium is measured after parenteral infusion of a dose of magnesium) to be the best method to assess magnesium status in adults. To comprehensively evaluate magnesium status, both laboratory tests and a clinical assessment might be required [6].
Recommended Intakes

The Food and Nutrition Board at the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine has established Recommended Dietary Allowances and Adequate Intakes for magnesium. These values range from 310 to 420 mg for adults and from 30 to 410 mg for infants, children, and adolescents, depending on age, sex, and life stage.

Intake recommendations for magnesium and other nutrients are provided in the Dietary Reference Intakes (DRIs) developed by the Food and Nutrition Board (FNB) at the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine [1]. DRI is the general term for a set of reference values used to plan and assess nutrient intakes of healthy people. These values include the following:

    Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA): Average daily level of intake sufficient to meet the nutrient requirements of nearly all (97%–98%) healthy individuals; often used to plan nutritionally adequate diets for individuals
    Adequate Intake (AI): Intake at this level is assumed to ensure nutritional adequacy; established when evidence is insufficient to develop an RDA
    Estimated Average Requirement (EAR): Average daily level of intake estimated to meet the requirements of 50% of healthy individuals; usually used to assess the nutrient intakes of groups of people and to plan nutritionally adequate diets for them; can also be used to assess the nutrient intakes of individuals
    Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL): Maximum daily intake unlikely to cause adverse health effects

Table 1 lists the current RDAs for magnesium [1]. For infants from birth to 12 months, the FNB established AIs for magnesium that are equivalent to the mean intake of magnesium in healthy, breastfed infants, with added solid foods for ages 7 to 12 months.
Table 1: Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDAs) for Magnesium in Milligrams (mg) [1] Age 	Male 	Female 	Pregnancy 	Lactation
0–6 months 	30 mg* 	30 mg* 		
7–12 months 	75 mg* 	75 mg* 		
1–3 years 	80 mg 	80 mg 		
4–8 years 	130 mg 	130 mg 		
9–13 years 	240 mg 	240 mg 		
14–18 years 	410 mg 	360 mg 	400 mg 	360 mg
19–30 years 	400 mg 	310 mg 	350 mg 	310 mg
31–50 years 	420 mg 	320 mg 	360 mg 	320 mg
51+ years 	420 mg 	320 mg 		

*Adequate Intake (AI)
Sources of Magnesium
Food

Good sources of magnesium include green leafy vegetables, legumes, nuts, seeds, whole grains, and certain beverages. Magnesium may also be added to some breakfast cereals and other fortified foods. In general, approximately 30% to 40% of the magnesium obtained from food and beverages is absorbed by the body.

Magnesium is widely distributed in plant and animal foods and in beverages. Green leafy vegetables (e.g., spinach), legumes, nuts, seeds, and whole grains, are good sources [1,3]. In general, foods that contain dietary fiber provide magnesium. Magnesium is also added to some breakfast cereals and other fortified foods. Some types of food processing, such as refining grains in ways that remove the nutrient-rich germ and bran, substantially lower the magnesium content [1]. Selected food sources of magnesium are listed in Table 2.

Tap, mineral, and bottled waters can also be sources of magnesium, but the amount of magnesium in water varies by source and brand (ranging from 1 mg/L to >120 mg/L) [8].

Approximately 30% to 40% of the dietary magnesium consumed is typically absorbed by the body [2,9].
Table 2: Magnesium Content of Selected Foods [10] Food 	Milligrams
(mg) per
serving 	Percent
DV*
Pumpkin seeds, roasted, 1 ounce 	156 	37
Chia seeds, 1 ounce 	111 	26
Almonds, dry roasted, 1 ounce 	80 	19
Spinach, boiled, ½ cup 	78 	19
Cashews, dry roasted, 1 ounce 	74 	18
Peanuts, oil roasted, ¼ cup 	63 	15
Cereal, shredded wheat, 2 large biscuits 	61 	15
Soymilk, plain or vanilla, 1 cup 	61 	15
Black beans, cooked, ½ cup 	60 	14
Edamame, shelled, cooked, ½ cup 	50 	12
Peanut butter, smooth, 2 tablespoons 	49 	12
Potato, baked with skin, 3.5 ounces 	43 	10
Rice, brown, cooked, ½ cup 	42 	10
Yogurt, plain, low fat, 8 ounces 	42 	10
Breakfast cereals, fortified with 10% of the DV for magnesium, 1 serving 	42 	10
Oatmeal, instant, 1 packet 	36 	9
Kidney beans, canned, ½ cup 	35 	8
Banana, 1 medium 	32 	8
Milk, 1 cup 	27 	6
Salmon, Atlantic, farmed, cooked, 3 ounces 	26 	6
Halibut, cooked, 3 ounces 	24 	6
Raisins, ½ cup 	23 	5
Bread, whole wheat, 1 slice 	23 	5
Avocado, cubed, ½ cup 	22 	5
Chicken breast, roasted, 3 ounces 	22 	5
Beef, ground, 90% lean, pan broiled, 3 ounces 	20 	5
Broccoli, chopped and cooked, ½ cup 	12 	3
Rice, white, cooked, ½ cup 	10 	2
Apple, 1 medium 	9 	2
Carrot, raw, 1 medium 	7 	2

*DV = Daily Value. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) developed DVs to help consumers compare the nutrient contents of foods and dietary supplements within the context of a total diet. The DV for magnesium is 420 mg for adults and children age 4 years and older [11]. FDA does not require food labels to list magnesium content unless magnesium has been added to the food. Foods providing 20% or more of the DV are considered to be high sources of a nutrient, but foods providing lower percentages of the DV also contribute to a healthful diet.

The U.S. Department of Agriculture’s (USDA’s) FoodData Central [10] lists the nutrient content of many foods and provides comprehensive list of foods containing magnesium arranged by nutrient content and by food name.
Dietary supplements

Supplements can contain a variety of different forms of magnesium, and the absorption of these forms varies. In general, forms of magnesium that dissolve well in liquid have higher absorption than other forms, and the aspartate, citrate, lactate, and chloride forms of magnesium tend to have higher bioavailability than magnesium oxide and magnesium sulfate.

Magnesium supplements are available in a variety of forms, including magnesium oxide, citrate, and chloride [2,3]. The Supplement Facts panel on a dietary supplement label declares the amount of elemental magnesium in the product, not the weight of the entire magnesium-containing compound.

The absorption of magnesium from different kinds of magnesium supplements varies. Forms of magnesium that dissolve well in liquid are more completely absorbed in the gut than less soluble forms [2,12]. Small studies have found that magnesium in the aspartate, citrate, lactate, and chloride forms is absorbed more completely and is more bioavailable than magnesium oxide and magnesium sulfate [12-16]. One study found that very high doses of zinc from supplements (142 mg/day) can interfere with magnesium absorption and disrupt the magnesium balance in the body [17].
Medicines

Magnesium is found in some remedies for heartburn and acid indigestion, and it is a key ingredient in certain laxatives.

Magnesium is a primary ingredient in some laxatives [18]. Phillips' Milk of Magnesia, for example, provides 500 mg elemental magnesium (as magnesium hydroxide) per tablespoon; the directions advise taking up to 4 tablespoons/day for adolescents and adults [19]. Although such a dose of magnesium is well above the safe upper level, some of the magnesium is not absorbed because of the medication's laxative effect. Magnesium is also included in some remedies for heartburn and upset stomach due to acid indigestion [18]. Extra-strength Rolaids, for example, provides 55 mg elemental magnesium (as magnesium hydroxide) per tablet [20], although Tums does not contain magnesium [21].
Magnesium Intakes and Status

Many people in the United States consume less than the recommended amounts of magnesium, with men age 71 years and older and adolescent males and females having the highest risk of low magnesium intakes. Survey data suggest that the average intakes of magnesium from food alone are higher among people who take dietary supplements that contain magnesium than among those who do not. There is no current data on magnesium status among people who live in the United States, as magnesium status is not routinely evaluated in national surveys, hospitals, or clinics.

Dietary surveys of people in the United States consistently show that many people consume less than the recommended amounts of magnesium. An analysis of data from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) of 2013–2016 found that 48% of Americans of all ages ingest less magnesium from food and beverages than their respective EARs; adult men age 71 years and older and adolescent males and females are most likely to have low intakes [22]. In a study that used 2003–2006 NHANES data to assess mineral intakes among adults, the average intakes of magnesium from food alone were higher among users of magnesium-containing dietary supplements (350 mg for men and 267 mg for women, equal to or slightly exceeding their respective EARs) than among nonusers (268 mg for men and 234 for women) [23]. When supplements were included, average total intakes of magnesium were 449 mg for men and 387 mg for women, well above EAR levels.

No current data on magnesium status in the United States are available. Determining dietary intake of magnesium is the usual proxy for assessing magnesium status. NHANES has not measured serum magnesium levels in its participants since 1974 [24], and magnesium is not evaluated during routine electrolyte testing in hospitals and clinics [2].
Magnesium Deficiency

Loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, and weakness are some of the early signs and symptoms of magnesium deficiency. As the condition progresses, people with magnesium deficiency may experience numbness, muscle contractions and cramps, seizures, abnormal heart rhythms, coronary spasms, and other symptoms. In severe cases, magnesium deficiency can cause hypocalcemia or hypokalemia. While certain health conditions and the use of certain medications can cause symptomatic magnesium deficiency, it is uncommon in healthy people.

Symptomatic magnesium deficiency due to low dietary intake in otherwise healthy people is uncommon because the kidneys limit urinary excretion of this mineral [3]. However, habitually low intakes or excessive losses of magnesium due to certain health conditions, chronic alcoholism, and/or the use of certain medications can lead to magnesium deficiency.

Early signs and symptoms of magnesium deficiency include loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, and weakness. As magnesium deficiency worsens, numbness, tingling, muscle contractions and cramps, seizures, personality changes, abnormal heart rhythms, and coronary spasms can occur [1,2]. Severe magnesium deficiency can disrupt mineral homeostasis and cause hypocalcemia (low serum calcium levels) or hypokalemia (low serum potassium levels) [2].
Groups at Risk of Magnesium Inadequacy

Certain groups of people are more likely than others to have magnesium inadequacy. These include people with gastrointestinal diseases, type 2 diabetes, or alcohol dependence and older adults.

Magnesium inadequacy can occur when intakes fall below the RDA but are above the amount required to prevent overt deficiency. The following groups are more likely than others to be at risk of magnesium inadequacy because they typically consume insufficient amounts or they have medical conditions (or take medications) that reduce magnesium absorption from the gut or increase losses from the body.
People with gastrointestinal diseases

The chronic diarrhea and fat malabsorption that occurs in people with Crohn's disease, gluten-sensitive enteropathy (celiac disease), and regional enteritis can lead to magnesium depletion over time [2]. Resection or bypass of the small intestine, especially the ileum, typically leads to malabsorption and magnesium loss [2].
People with type 2 diabetes

Magnesium deficits and increased urinary magnesium excretion can occur in people with insulin resistance and/or type 2 diabetes [25,26]. The magnesium loss appears to be secondary to higher concentrations of glucose in the kidney that increase urine output [2].
People with alcohol dependence

Magnesium deficiency is common in people with chronic alcoholism [2]. In these individuals, poor dietary intake and nutritional status; gastrointestinal problems, including vomiting, diarrhea, and steatorrhea (fatty stools) resulting from pancreatitis; renal dysfunction with excess excretion of magnesium into the urine; phosphate depletion; vitamin D deficiency; acute alcoholic ketoacidosis; and hyperaldosteronism secondary to liver disease can all contribute to decreased magnesium status [2,27].
Older adults

Older adults have lower dietary intakes of magnesium than younger adults [21,28]. In addition, magnesium absorption from the gut decreases and renal magnesium excretion increases with age [29]. Older adults are also more likely to have chronic diseases or take medications that alter magnesium status, which can increase their risk of magnesium depletion [1,30].
Magnesium and Health

Habitually low intakes of magnesium induce changes in biochemical pathways that can increase the risk of illness over time. This section focuses on four diseases and disorders in which magnesium might be involved: hypertension and cardiovascular disease, type 2 diabetes, osteoporosis, and migraine headaches.
Hypertension and cardiovascular disease

Results from clinical trials suggest that magnesium supplementation only marginally lowers blood pressure. Although some prospective studies have reported that people with higher intakes and/or serum levels of magnesium have lower risks of sudden cardiac death, ischemic heart disease, and stroke, more research is needed to understand the effects of magnesium from food and dietary supplements on cardiovascular disease.

Hypertension is a major risk factor for heart disease and stroke. Studies to date, however, have found that magnesium supplementation only marginally lowers blood pressure. A Cochrane Review that inclded 12 clinical trials found that magnesium supplementation for 8 to 26 weeks in 545 hypertensive participants resulted in only a small reduction (2.2 millimetes of mercury [mmHg]) in diastolic blood pressure [31]. The dose of magnesium ranged from approximately 243 to 973 mg/day. The authors of another meta-analysis of 22 studies with 1,173 normotensive and hypertensive adults concluded that magnesium supplementation for 3 to 24 weeks decreased systolic blood pressure by 3 to 4 mmHg and diastolic blood pressure by 2 to 3 mmHg [32]. The effects were somewhat larger when the supplemental magnesium intakes of the participants in the nine crossover-design trials exceeded 370 mg/day. A diet that contained more magnesium because of added fruits and vegetables, more low-fat or nonfat dairy products, and less fat overall was shown to lower systolic and diastolic blood pressure by an average of 5.5 and 3.0 mmHg, respectively [33]. However, this Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) diet also increases intakes of other nutrients, such as potassium and calcium, that are associated with reductions in blood pressure, so any independent contribution of magnesium cannot be determined.

In 2022, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved a qualified health claim for conventional foods and dietary supplements that contain magnesium [34]. One example of this claim states, “Consuming diets with adequate magnesium may reduce the risk of high blood pressure (hypertension). However, FDA has concluded that the evidence is inconsistent and inconclusive.” FDA also specifies that the foods and dietary supplements that carry this claim on their labels must provide at least 84 mg of magnesium per serving and, for dietary supplements, no more than 350 mg.

Several prospective studies have examined the associations between magnesium intakes and heart disease. The Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities Study assessed heart disease risk factors and levels of serum magnesium in a cohort of 14,232 White and African-American men and women age 45 to 64 years at baseline [35]. Over an average of 12 years of follow-up, individuals in the highest quartile of the normal physiologic range of serum magnesium (≥0.88 mmol/L) had a 38% reduced risk of sudden cardiac death compared with individuals in the lowest quartile (≤0.75 mmol/L). However, dietary magnesium intakes had no association with risk of sudden cardiac death. Another prospective study tracked 88,375 female nurses in the United States to determine whether plasma magnesium levels and total magnesium intakes were associated with sudden cardiac death [36]. Magnesium levels were measured early in the study, and magnesium intakes from food and supplements were assessed every 2 to 4 years over 26 year of follow-up. The risk of sudden cardiac death was significantly lower for women in the highest quartile of ingested magnesium (37% lower risk) and women in the highest quartile of plasma magnesium concentration (77% lower risk) than for those in the lowest quartiles. Another prospective population study of 7,664 adults age 20 to 75 years in the Netherlands who did not have cardiovascular disease found that low urinary magnesium excretion levels (a marker for low dietary magnesium intake) were associated with a higher risk of ischemic heart disease over a median follow-up period of 10.5 years. Plasma magnesium concentrations were not associated with risk of ischemic heart disease [37]. A systematic review and meta-analysis of prospective studies found that higher serum levels of magnesium were significantly associated with a lower risk of cardiovascular disease, and higher dietary magnesium intakes (up to approximately 250 mg/day) were associated with a significantly lower risk of ischemic heart disease caused by a reduced blood supply to the heart muscle [38].

Higher magnesium intakes might reduce the risk of stroke. In a meta-analysis of seven prospective trials with a total of 241,378 participants, an additional 100 mg/day magnesium in the diet was associated with an 8% decrease in the risk of total stroke and a 9% decrease in the risk of ischemic stroke [39]. One limitation of such observational studies, however, is the possibility of confounding with other nutrients or dietary components that could also affect the risk of stroke.

A large, well-designed clinical trial is needed to better understand the contributions of magnesium from food and dietary supplements to heart health and the primary prevention of cardiovascular disease [40].
Type 2 diabetes

Several meta-analyses of prospective cohort studies have reported that individuals who have higher magnesium intakes tend to have a lower risk of type 2 diabetes. However, only a few small clinical trials have evaluated using supplemental magnesium to control type 2 diabetes, and these trials have reported conflicting results. According to the American Diabetes Association, there is currently not enough evidence to recommend using magnesium to improve glycemic control in people with diabetes.

Diets with higher amounts of magnesium are associated with a significantly lower risk of diabetes, possibly because of the important role of magnesium in glucose metabolism [41,42]. Hypomagnesemia might worsen insulin resistance, a condition that often precedes diabetes, or it might be a consequence of insulin resistance [43]. Diabetes leads to increased urinary losses of magnesium, and the subsequent magnesium inadequacy might impair insulin secretion and action, thereby worsening diabetes control [3].

Most of the investigations of magnesium intake and the risk of type 2 diabetes have been prospective cohort studies. A meta-analysis of seven of these studies, which included 286,668 patients and 10,912 cases of diabetes over 6 to 17 years of follow-up, found that a 100 mg/day increase in total magnesium intake decreased the risk of diabetes by a statistically significant 15% [41]. Another meta-analysis of eight prospective cohort studies that followed 271,869 men and women over 4 to 18 years found a significant inverse association between magnesium intake from food and risk of type 2 diabetes; the relative risk reduction was 23% when the highest to lowest intakes were compared [44].

A 2011 meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies that analyzed the association between magnesium intake and the risk of type 2 diabetes included 13 studies with a total of 536,318 participants and 24,516 cases of diabetes [45]. The mean length of follow-up ranged from 4 to 20 years. Investigators found an inverse association between magnesium intake and the risk of type 2 diabetes in a dose-responsive fashion, but this association achieved statistical significance only in individuals who were overweight (body mass index [BMI] ≥25) but not in normal-weight individuals (BMI <25). Again, a limitation of these observational studies is the possibility of confounding with other dietary components or lifestyle or environmental variables that are correlated with magnesium intake.

Only a few small, short-term clinical trials have examined the potential effects of supplemental magnesium on control of type 2 diabetes, and the results are conflicting [42,46]. For example, 128 patients with poorly controlled diabetes in a Brazilian clinical trial received a daily placebo or a supplement that contained either 500 mg or 1,000 mg magnesium oxide (providing 300 or 600 mg elemental magnesium, respectively) [47]. After 30 days of supplementation, plasma, cellular, and urine magnesium levels increased in participants who received the larger dose of the supplement, and their glycemic control improved. In another small trial in Mexico, participants with type 2 diabetes and hypomagnesemia who received a liquid supplement of magnesium chloride (providing 300 mg/day elemental magnesium) for 16 weeks showed significant reductions in fasting glucose and glycosylated hemoglobin concentrations compared with participants receiving a placebo, and their serum magnesium levels became normal [48]. In contrast, taking a magnesium aspartate supplement (which provided 369 mg/day elemental magnesium) for 3 months did not affect glycemic control in 50 patients with type 2 diabetes who were taking insulin [49].

The American Diabetes Association states that there is insufficient evidence to support the routine use of magnesium to improve glycemic control in people with diabetes [46]. It further notes that there is no clear scientific evidence that vitamin and mineral supplementation benefits people with diabetes who do not have underlying nutritional deficiencies.
Osteoporosis

Magnesium is essential for bone health, and some studies have found that higher intakes of magnesium are associated with increased bone mineral density. Other studies have reported finding low serum magnesium levels among women with osteoporosis. However, more research is needed to determine whether magnesium supplements can help prevent or manage osteoporosis.

Magnesium is involved in bone formation and influences the activities of osteoblasts and osteoclasts [50]. Magnesium also affects the concentrations of both parathyroid hormone and the active form of vitamin D, which are major regulators of bone homeostasis. Several population-based studies have found positive associations between magnesium intake and bone mineral density in both men and women [51]. Other research has found that women with osteoporosis have lower serum magnesium levels than women with osteopenia and those who do not have osteoporosis or osteopenia [52]. These and other findings indicate that magnesium deficiency might be a risk factor for osteoporosis [50].

A small number of studies suggest that increasing magnesium intakes from food or supplements might increase bone mineral density in postmenopausal women [1]. For example, one short-term study found that 290 mg/day elemental magnesium (as magnesium citrate) for 30 days in 20 postmenopausal women with osteoporosis suppressed bone turnover compared with placebo, suggesting that bone loss decreased [53].

Diets that provide the recommended levels of magnesium enhance bone health, but further research is needed to elucidate the role of magnesium in the prevention and management of osteoporosis.
Migraine headaches

Low levels of serum and tissue magnesium appear to be associated with the occurrence of migraine headaches. Some research has suggested that the regular use of magnesium supplements may reduce the frequency of migraines. Although the data are limited, the American Academy of Neurology and the American Headache Society have concluded that magnesium is probably effective for migraine prevention.

Magnesium deficiency is related to factors that promote headaches, including neurotransmitter release and vasoconstriction [54]. People who experience migraine headaches have lower levels of serum and tissue magnesium than those who do not.

However, research on the use of magnesium supplements to prevent or reduce symptoms of migraine headaches is limited. Three out of four small, short-term, placebo-controlled trials found modest reductions in the frequency of migraines in patients who were given up to 600 mg/day magnesium [54]. While the fourth trial found that magnesium did not reduce the frequency of migraines, the magnesium may have been poorly absorbed since many of the participants who received magnesium reported soft stools or diarrhea. The authors of a review on migraine prophylaxis suggested that taking 300 mg magnesium twice a day, either alone or in combination with medication, can prevent migraines [55].

In their evidence-based guideline update, the American Academy of Neurology and the American Headache Society concluded that magnesium therapy is probably effective for migraine prevention [56]. Because the typical dose of magnesium that is used for migraine prevention exceeds the UL, this treatment should be used only under the direction and supervision of a health care provider.
Health Risks from Excessive Magnesium

Although the risk of acquiring too much magnesium from food is low among healthy people, high doses of magnesium from dietary supplements or medications can cause diarrhea, nausea, and abdominal cramping. Very high doses of magnesium can lead to magnesium toxicity, which can cause hypotension, vomiting, difficulty breathing, irregular heartbeat, cardiac arrest, and other signs and symptoms. A few cases of fatal hypermagnesemia have been reported. The Tolerable Upper Intake Level for supplemental magnesium is 350 mg for adults, and it ranges from 65 to 350 mg for children and adolescents, depending on age.

Too much magnesium from food does not pose a health risk in healthy individuals because the kidneys eliminate excess amounts in the urine [29]. However, high doses of magnesium from dietary supplements or medications often result in diarrhea that can be accompanied by nausea and abdominal cramping [1]. The forms of magnesium that are most commonly reported to cause diarrhea include magnesium carbonate, chloride, gluconate, and oxide [12]. The diarrhea and laxative effects of magnesium salts are due to the osmotic activity of unabsorbed salts in the intestine and colon and the stimulation of gastric motility [57].

Very large doses of magnesium-containing laxatives and antacids (typically those that provide >5,000 mg/day magnesium) have been associated with magnesium toxicity [58], including fatal hypermagnesemia in a 28-month-old boy [59] and an elderly man [60]. Signs and symptoms of magnesium toxicity, which usually develop after serum concentrations exceed 1.74 to 2.61 mmol/L, can include hypotension, nausea, vomiting, facial flushing, retention of urine, ileus, depression, and lethargy before progressing to muscle weakness, difficulty breathing, extreme hypotension, irregular heartbeat, and cardiac arrest [29]. The risk of magnesium toxicity increases with impaired renal function or kidney failure because the ability to remove excess magnesium is reduced or lost [1,29].

The FNB has established ULs for supplemental magnesium for healthy infants, children, and adults (see Table 3) [1]. For many age groups, the UL appears to be lower than the RDA. This occurs because the RDAs include magnesium from all sources—food, beverages, dietary supplements, and medications. The ULs only include magnesium from dietary supplements and medications; they do not include magnesium found naturally in food and beverages.
Table 3: Tolerable Upper Intake Levels (ULs) for Supplemental Magnesium in Milligrams (mg) [1] Age 	Male 	Female 	Pregnant 	Lactating
0–6 months 	None established 	None established 		
7–12 months 	None established 	None established 		
1–3 years 	65 mg 	65 mg 		
4–8 years 	110 mg 	110 mg 		
9–13 years 	350 mg 	350 mg 		
14–18 years 	350 mg 	350 mg 	350 mg 	350 mg
19–30 years 	350 mg 	350 mg 	350 mg 	350 mg
31–50 years 	350 mg 	350 mg 	350 mg 	350 mg
51+ years 	350 mg 	350 mg 		
 
Interactions with Medications

Magnesium may interact with certain medications, such as oral bisphosphonates, tetracyclines, and quinolone antibiotics. In addition, some medications, including diuretics and proton pump inhibitors, can affect magnesium status.

Several types of medications have the potential to interact with magnesium supplements or affect magnesium status. A few examples are provided below. People who are taking these and other medications on a regular basis should discuss their magnesium intakes with their health care providers.
Bisphosphonates

Magnesium-rich supplements or medications can decrease the absorption of oral bisphosphonates, such as alendronate (Fosamax), that are used to treat osteoporosis [61]. Taking magnesium-rich supplements or medications at least 2 hours before or after oral bisphosphonates can minimize this interaction [57].
Antibiotics

Magnesium can form insoluble complexes with tetracyclines, such as demeclocycline (Declomycin) and doxycycline (Vibramycin), and with quinolone antibiotics, such as ciprofloxacin (Cipro) and levofloxacin (Levaquin). These antibiotics should be taken at least 2 hours before or 4 to 6 hours after a magnesium-containing supplement [57,62].
Diuretics

Chronic treatment with loop diuretics, such as furosemide (Lasix) and bumetanide (Bumex), and thiazide diuretics, such as hydrochlorothiazide (Aquazide H) and ethacrynic acid (Edecrin), can increase the loss of magnesium in urine and lead to magnesium depletion [63]. In contrast, potassium-sparing diuretics, such as amiloride (Midamor) and spironolactone (Aldactone), reduce magnesium excretion [63].
Proton pump inhibitors

Prescription proton pump inhibitor (PPI) drugs, such as esomeprazole magnesium (Nexium) and lansoprazole (Prevacid), can cause hypomagnesemia when taken for prolonged periods (typically more than a year) [64]. In the cases that FDA reviewed, magnesium supplements often raised the low serum magnesium levels caused by PPIs. However, in 25% of the cases, supplements did not raise magnesium levels and the patients had to discontinue the PPI. FDA advises health care professionals to consider measuring patients' serum magnesium levels prior to initiating long-term PPI treatment and to check magnesium levels in these patients periodically [64].
Magnesium and Healthful Diets

In general, a person’s nutritional needs should be met primarily through the diet, including fortified foods. Dietary supplements may be useful in cases where it is not possible to meet the needs for specific nutrients through food alone, especially during certain life stages. The Dietary Guidelines for Americans offers a general description of healthy dietary patterns.

The federal government's 2020–2025 Dietary Guidelines for Americans notes that "Because foods provide an array of nutrients and other components that have benefits for health, nutritional needs should be met primarily through foods....In some cases, fortified foods and dietary supplements are useful when it is not possible otherwise to meet needs for one or more nutrients (e.g., during specific life stages such as pregnancy)."

For more information about building a healthy dietary pattern, refer to the Dietary Guidelines for Americans and the USDA's MyPlate.

The Dietary Guidelines for Americans describes a healthy dietary pattern as one that

    Includes a variety of vegetables; fruits; grains (at least half whole grains); fat-free and low-fat milk, yogurt, and cheese; and oils.
        Whole grains and dark-green, leafy vegetables are good sources of magnesium. Low-fat milk and yogurt contain magnesium as well. Some ready-to-eat breakfast cereals are fortified with magnesium.
    Includes a variety of protein-rich foods, such as lean meats, poultry, eggs, seafood, beans, peas, lentils, nuts, seeds, and soy products.
        Dried beans and legumes (e.g., soybeans, baked beans, lentils, peanuts) and nuts (e.g., almonds, cashews) are good sources of magnesium.
    Limits foods and beverages that are higher in added sugars, saturated fat, and sodium.
    Limits alcoholic beverages.
    Stays within your daily calorie needs.

References

    Institute of Medicine (IOM). Food and Nutrition Board. Dietary Reference Intakes: Calcium, Phosphorus, Magnesium, Vitamin D and Fluoride. Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 1997.
    Rude RK. Magnesium. In: Coates PM, Betz JM, Blackman MR, Cragg GM, Levine M, Moss J, White JD, eds. Encyclopedia of Dietary Supplements. 2nd ed. New York, NY: Informa Healthcare; 2010:527-37.
    Rude RK. Magnesium. In: Ross AC, Caballero B, Cousins RJ, Tucker KL, Ziegler TR, eds. Modern Nutrition in Health and Disease. 11th ed. Baltimore, Mass: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2012:159-75.
    Volpe SL. Magnesium. In: Erdman JW, Macdonald IA, Zeisel SH, eds. Present Knowledge in Nutrition. 10th ed. Ames, Iowa; John Wiley & Sons, 2012:459-74.
    Elin RJ. Assessment of magnesium status for diagnosis and therapy. Magnes Res 2010;23:1-5. [PubMed abstract]
    Gibson, RS. Principles of Nutritional Assessment, 2nd ed. New York, NY: Oxford University Press, 2005.
    Witkowski M, Hubert J, Mazur A. Methods of assessment of magnesium status in humans: a systematic review. Magnesium Res 2011;24:163-80. [PubMed abstract]
    Azoulay A, Garzon P, Eisenberg MJ. Comparison of the mineral content of tap water and bottled waters. J Gen Intern Med 2001;16:168-75. [PubMed abstract]
    Fine KD, Santa Ana CA, Porter JL, Fordtran JS. Intestinal absorption of magnesium from food and supplements. J Clin Invest 1991;88:396-402. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service. FoodData Central, 2019.
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Food Labeling: Revision of the Nutrition and Supplement Facts Labels. 2016.
    Ranade VV, Somberg JC. Bioavailability and pharmacokinetics of magnesium after administration of magnesium salts to humans. Am J Ther 2001;8:345-57. [PubMed abstract]
    Firoz M, Graber M. Bioavailability of US commercial magnesium preparations. Magnes Res 2001;14:257-62. [PubMed abstract]
    Mühlbauer B, Schwenk M, Coram WM, Antonin KH, Etienne P, Bieck PR, Douglas FL. Magnesium-L-aspartate-HCl and magnesium-oxide: bioavailability in healthy volunteers. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 1991;40:437-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Lindberg JS, Zobitz MM, Poindexter JR, Pak CY. Magnesium bioavailability from magnesium citrate and magnesium oxide. J Am Coll Nutr 1990;9:48-55. [PubMed abstract]
    Walker AF, Marakis G, Christie S, Byng M. Mg citrate found more bioavailable than other Mg preparations in a randomized, double-blind study. Mag Res 2003;16:183-91. [PubMed abstract]
    Spencer H, Norris C, Williams D. Inhibitory effects of zinc on magnesium balance and magnesium absorption in man. J Am Coll Nutr 1994;13:479-84. [PubMed abstract]
    Guerrera MP, Volpe SL, Mao JJ. Therapeutic uses of magnesium. Am Fam Physician 2009;80:157-62. [PubMed abstract]
    Phillips'®. Phillips’ Milk of Magnesia. 2020.
    Rolaids®. 2012.
    Tums®. 2012.
    U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service. Usual Nutrient Intake from Food and Beverages, by Gender and Age, What We Eat in America, NHANES 2013-2016; 2019.
    Bailey RL, Fulgoni III VL, Keast DR, Dwyer JD. Dietary supplement use is associated with high intakes of minerals from food sources. Am J Clin Nutr 2011;94:1376-81. [PubMed abstract]
    Rosanoff A, Weaver CM, Rude RK. Suboptimal magnesium status in the United States: are the health consequences underestimated? Nutr Rev 2012;70:153-64. [PubMed abstract]
    Chaudhary DP, Sharma R, Bansal DD. Implications of magnesium deficiency in type 2 diabetes: a review. Biol Trace Elem Res 2010;134:119–29. [PubMed abstract]
    Tosiello L. Hypomagnesemia and diabetes mellitus. A review of clinical implications. Arch Intern Med 1996;156:1143-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Rivlin RS. Magnesium deficiency and alcohol intake: mechanisms, clinical significance and possible relation to cancer development (a review). J Am Coll Nutr 1994;13:416–23. [PubMed abstract]
    Ford ES, Mokdad AH. Dietary magnesium intake in a national sample of U.S. adults. J Nutr 2003;133:2879-82. [PubMed abstract]
    Musso CG Magnesium metabolism in health and disease. Int Urol Nephrol 2009;41:357-62. [PubMed abstract]
    Barbagallo M, Belvedere M, Dominguez LJ. Magnesium homeostasis and aging. Magnes Res 2009;22:235-46. [PubMed abstract]
    Dickinson HO, Nicolson D, Campbell F, Cook JV, Beyer FR, Ford GA, Mason J. Magnesium supplementation for the management of primary hypertension in adults. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2006: CD004640. [PubMed abstract]
    Kass L, Weekes J, Carpenter L. Effect of magnesium supplementation on blood pressure: a meta-analysis. Eur J Clin Nutr 2012;66:411-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Champagne CM. Dietary interventions on blood pressure: the Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) trials. Nutr Rev 2006;64:S53-6. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. RE: Petition for a qualified health claim for magnesium and reduced risk of high blood pressure (hypertension) (docket No. FDA-2016-Q-3770). January 10, 2022.
    Peacock JM, Ohira T, Post W, Sotoodehnia N, Rosamond W, Folsom AR. Serum magnesium and risk of sudden cardiac death in the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) study. Am Heart J 2010;160:464-70. [PubMed abstract]
    Chiuve SE, Korngold EC, Januzzi Jr JL, Gantzer ML, Albert CM. Plasma and dietary magnesium and risk of sudden cardiac death in women. Am J Clin Nutr 2011;93:253-60. [PubMed abstract]
    Joosten MM, Gansevoort RT, Mukamal KJ, van der Harst P, Geleijnse JM, Feskens EJM, Navis G, Bakker SJL. Urinary and plasma magnesium and risk of ischemic heart disease. Am J Clin Nutr 2013;97:1299-306. [PubMed abstract]
    Del Gobbo LC, Imamura F, Wu JHY, Otto MCdO, Chiuve SE, Mozaffarian D. Circulating and dietary magnesium and risk of cardiovascular disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis of prospective studies. Am J Clin Nutr 2013;98:160-73. [PubMed abstract]
    Larsson SC, Orsini N, Wolk A. Dietary magnesium intake and risk of stroke: a meta-analysis of prospective studies. Am J Clin Nutr 2012;95:362-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Song Y, Liu S. Magnesium for cardiovascular health: time for intervention. Am J Clin Nutr 2012;95:269-70. [PubMed abstract]
    Larsson SC, Wolk A. Magnesium intake and risk of type 2 diabetes: a meta-analysis. J Intern Med 2007;262:208-14. [PubMed abstract]
    Rodriguez-Moran M, Simental Mendia LE, Zambrano Galvan G, Guerrero-Romero F. The role of magnesium in type 2 diabetes: a brief based-clinical review. Magnes Res 2011;24:156-62. [PubMed abstract]
    Simmons D, Joshi S, Shaw J. Hypomagnesaemia is associated with diabetes: not pre-diabetes, obesity or the metabolic syndrome. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2010;87:261-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Schulze MB, Schulz M, Heidemann C, Schienkiewitz A, Hoffmann K, Boeing H. Fiber and magnesium intake and incidence of type 2 diabetes: a prospective study and meta-analysis. Arch Intern Med 2007;167:956–65. [PubMed abstract]
    Dong J-Y, Xun P, He K, Qin L-Q. Magnesium intake and risk of type 2 diabetes: meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies. Diabetes Care 2011;34:2116-22. [PubMed abstract]
    Evert AB, Boucher JL, Cypress M, Dunbar SA, Franz MJ, Mayer-Davis EJ, Neumiller JJ, Nwankwo R, Verdi CL, Urbanski P, Yancy WS Jr. Nutrition therapy recommendations for the management of adults with diabetes. Diabetes Care 2013;36:3821-42. [PubMed abstract]
    Lima MDL, Cruz T, Pousada JC, Rodrigues LE, Barbosa K, Canguco V. The effect of magnesium supplementation in increasing doses on the control of type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care 1998;21:682-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Rodriquez-Moran M, Guerrero-Romero F. Oral magnesium supplementation improves insulin sensitivity and metabolic control in type 2 diabetic subjects: a randomized double-blind controlled trial. Diabetes Care 2003;26:1147-52. [PubMed abstract]
    de Valk HW, Verkaaik R, van Rijn HJ, Geerdink RA, Struyvenberg A. Oral magnesium supplementation in insulin-requiring Type 2 diabetic patients. Diabet Med 1998;15:503-7 [PubMed abstract]
    Rude RK, Singer FR, Gruber HE. Skeletal and hormonal effects of magnesium deficiency. J Am Coll Nutr 2009;28:131–41. [PubMed abstract]
    Tucker KL. Osteoporosis prevention and nutrition. Curr Osteoporos Rep 2009;7:111-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Mutlu M, Argun M, Kilic E, Saraymen R, Yazar S. Magnesium, zinc and copper status in osteoporotic, osteopenic and normal post-menopausal women. J Int Med Res 2007;35:692-5. [PubMed abstract]
    Aydin H, Deyneli O, Yavuz D, Gözü H, Mutlu N, Kaygusuz I, Akalin S. Short-term oral magnesium supplementation suppresses bone turnover in postmenopausal osteoporotic women. Biol Trace Elem Res 2010;133:136-43. [PubMed abstract]
    Sun-Edelstein C, Mauskop A. Role of magnesium in the pathogenesis and treatment of migraine. Expert Rev Neurother 2009;9:369–79 [PubMed abstract]
    Schürks M, Diener H-C, Goadsby P. Update on the prophylaxis of migraine. Cur Treat Options Neurol 2008;10:20–9. [PubMed abstract]
    Holland S, Silberstein SD, Freitag F, Dodick DW, Argoff C, Ashman E. Evidence-based guideline update: NSAIDs and other complementary treatments for episodic migraine prevention in adults. Neurology 2012;78:1346-53. [PubMed abstract]
    Natural Medicines Comprehensive Database. Magnesium. 2013.
    Kutsal E, Aydemir C, Eldes N, Demirel F, Polat R, Taspnar O, Kulah E. Severe hypermagnesemia as a result of excessive cathartic ingestion in a child without renal failure. Pediatr Emerg Care 2007;23:570-2. [PubMed abstract]
    McGuire JK, Kulkarni MS, Baden HP. Fatal hypermagnesemia in a child treated with megavitamin/megamineral therapy. Pediatrics 2000;105:E18. [PubMed abstract]
    Onishi S, Yoshino S. Cathartic-induced fatal hypermagnesemia in the elderly. Intern Med 2006;45:207-10. [PubMed abstract]
    Dunn CJ, Goa KL. Risedronate: A review of its pharmacological properties and clinical use in resorptive bone disease. Drugs 2001;61:685-712. [PubMed abstract]
    Arayne MS, Sultana N, Hussain F. Interactions between ciprofloxacin and antacids--dissolution and adsorption studies. Drug Metabol Drug Interact 2005;21:117-29. [PubMed abstract]
    Sarafidis PA, Georgianos PI, Lasaridis AN. Diuretics in clinical practice. Part II: electrolyte and acid-base disorders complicating diuretic therapy. Expert Opin Drug Saf 2010;9:259-73. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Proton Pump Inhibitor Drugs (PPIs): Drug Safety Communication—Low Magnesium Levels Can Be Associated With Long-Term Use. March 2, 2011.

Disclaimer

This fact sheet by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Office of Dietary Supplements (ODS) provides information that should not take the place of medical advice. We encourage you to talk to your health care providers (doctor, registered dietitian, pharmacist, etc.) about your interest in, questions about, or use of dietary supplements and what may be best for your overall health. Any mention in this publication of a specific product or service, or recommendation from an organization or professional society, does not represent an endorsement by ODS of that product, service, or expert advice.

Updated: January 6, 2026


 Manganese: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals (original version)
Manganese: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals
Table of Contents

    Introduction
    Recommended Intakes
    Sources of Manganese
    Manganese Intakes and Status
    Manganese Deficiency
    Groups at Risk of Manganese Inadequacy
    Manganese and Health
    Health Risks from Excessive Manganese
    Interactions with Medications
    Manganese and Healthful Diets
    References
    Disclaimer

Introduction

Manganese is an essential trace element that is naturally present in many foods and available as a dietary supplement. Manganese is a cofactor for many enzymes, including manganese superoxide dismutase, arginase, and pyruvate carboxylase [1,2]. Through the action of these enzymes, manganese is involved in amino acid, cholesterol, glucose, and carbohydrate metabolism; reactive oxygen species scavenging; bone formation; reproduction; and immune response [3-7]. Manganese also plays a role in blood clotting and hemostasis in conjunction with vitamin K [5].

Manganese is absorbed in the small intestine through an active transport system and, possibly, through diffusion when intakes are high [2]. After absorption, some manganese remains free, but most is bound to transferrin, albumin, and plasma alpha-2-macroglobulin. Manganese is taken up by the liver and other tissues, but the mechanism of this process is not well understood [1,2].

The human body contains about 10 to 20 mg manganese, of which 25% to 40% is in bone [1,2]. The liver, pancreas, kidney, and brain also contain manganese. The body maintains stable tissue manganese concentrations through regulatory control of manganese absorption and excretion [5]. More than 90% of absorbed manganese is excreted via bile into the feces, and a small amount is reabsorbed [1,2,4,5]. Very little is excreted in urine.

Manganese status is difficult to assess and not routinely measured in clinical practice. Normal whole blood concentrations of manganese range from 4 to 15 mcg/L [1], but they are highly variable and their utility as a status indicator is unclear [4]. Some studies that measured serum or plasma manganese concentrations in apparently healthy adults have shown mean serum concentrations of 1.04 mcg/L and mean plasma concentrations of 1.28 mcg/L [4,8]. Large variations in manganese intakes appear to affect these concentrations somewhat [9]. However, these concentrations often do not correlate well with typical manganese intakes, so whether they are useful indicators of manganese status is not clear [4].

Although urinary manganese concentrations decrease with severe deficiency, it is not clear whether they are useful indicators of manganese status when intakes are within the normal range [4].
Recommended Intakes

Intake recommendations for manganese and other nutrients are provided in the Dietary Reference Intakes (DRIs) developed by an expert committee of the Food and Nutrition Board (FNB) at the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine [4]. DRI is the general term for a set of reference values used for planning and assessing nutrient intakes of healthy people. These values, which vary by age and sex, include:

    Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA): Average daily level of intake sufficient to meet the nutrient requirements of nearly all (97%–98%) healthy individuals; often used to plan nutritionally adequate diets for individuals
    Adequate Intake (AI): Intake at this level is assumed to ensure nutritional adequacy; established when evidence is insufficient to develop an RDA
    Estimated Average Requirement (EAR): Average daily level of intake estimated to meet the requirements of 50% of healthy individuals; usually used to assess the nutrient intakes of groups of people and to plan nutritionally adequate diets for them; can also be used to assess the nutrient intakes of individuals
    Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL): Maximum daily intake unlikely to cause adverse health effects

In its 2001 evaluation, the FNB found the existing data insufficient to derive an EAR for manganese. The FNB therefore established AIs for all ages based on usual manganese intakes in healthy populations [4]. Table 1 lists the current AIs for manganese.
Table 1: Adequate Intakes (AIs) for Manganese [4] Age 	Male 	Female 	Pregnancy 	Lactation
Birth to 6 months* 	0.003 mg 	0.003 mg 		
7–12 months 	0.6 mg 	0.6 mg 		
1–3 years 	1.2 mg 	1.2 mg 		
4–8 years 	1.5 mg 	1.5 mg 		
9–13 years 	1.9 mg 	1.6 mg 		
14–18 years 	2.2 mg 	1.6 mg 	2.0 mg 	2.6 mg
19–50 years 	2.3 mg 	1.8 mg 	2.0 mg 	2.6 mg
51+ years 	2.3 mg 	1.8 mg 		

*For infants from birth to age 6 months, the AI is based on mean manganese intakes of infants fed primarily human milk.
Sources of Manganese
Food

Manganese is present in a wide variety of foods, including whole grains, clams, oysters, mussels, nuts, soybeans and other legumes, rice, leafy vegetables, coffee, tea, and many spices such as black pepper [1,2,5,10,11]. Drinking water also contains small amounts of manganese at concentrations of 1 to 100 mcg/L [5]. The top sources of manganese in the diets of U.S. adults are grain products, tea, and vegetables [4].

Manganese concentrations are 3 to 10 mcg/L in breast milk and 30 to 100 mcg/L in cow’s milk–based infant formulas [5,12]. Soy-based infant formulas have higher manganese concentrations, 200 to 300 mcg/L, than milk-based formulas [12]. Limited research suggests that the absorption rate of manganese from human milk (8.2%) is much higher than that from soy formula (0.7%) and cow’s milk formula (3.1%) [13].

Humans absorb only about 1% to 5% of dietary manganese [2,5,7]. Infants and children tend to absorb greater amounts of manganese than adults [7]. In addition, manganese absorption efficiency increases with low manganese intakes and decreases with higher intakes [1,2], but little is known about the mechanisms that control absorption [1].

Dietary iron intakes and iron status (measured by serum ferritin concentration) appear to be inversely associated with manganese absorption [14,15]. The mechanism for this effect is unknown, but the shared transporter of iron and manganese in the intestine might play a role [2]. In addition, men appear to absorb dietary manganese less efficiently than women, possibly because men usually have higher iron status [7,16]. Infants absorb higher proportions of manganese than adults; limited research shows that formula-fed infants retain about 20% of the manganese they consume [5].

Selected food sources of manganese are listed in Table 2.
Table 2: Manganese Content of Selected Foods [10,11] Food 	Milligrams
(mg) per
serving 	Percent
DV*
Mussels, blue, cooked, 3 ounces 	5.8 	252
Hazelnuts, dry roasted, 1 ounce 	1.6 	70
Pecans, dry roasted, 1 ounce 	1.1 	48
Brown rice, medium grain, cooked, ½ cup 	1.1 	48
Oysters, Pacific, cooked, 3 ounces 	1.0 	43
Clams, cooked, 3 ounces 0.9 	0.9 	39
Chickpeas, cooked, ½ cup 	0.9 	39
Spinach, boiled, ½ cup 	0.8 	35
Pineapple, raw, chunks, ½ cup 	0.8 	35
Soybeans, boiled, ½ cup 	0.7 	30
Bread, whole wheat, 1 slice 	0.7 	30
Oatmeal, cooked, ½ cup 	0.7 	30
Peanuts, oil-roasted, 1 ounce 	0.5 	22
Tea, black, brewed, 1 cup 	0.5 	22
Lentils, cooked, ½ cup 	0.5 	22
Potato, flesh and skin, baked, 1 medium 	0.3 	13
White rice, long grain, cooked, ½ cup 	0.3 	13
Kidney beans, canned, drained, rinsed, ½ cup 	0.3 	13
Squash, acorn, cooked, cubed, ½ cup 	0.3 	13
Blueberries, raw, ½ cup 	0.3 	13
Sesame seeds, dried, 1 tablespoon 	0.2 	9
Kale, raw, 1 cup 	0.2 	9
Black pepper, 1 gram (about ½ tsp) 	0.2 	9
Asparagus, boiled, ½ cup 	0.1 	4
Apple, raw, with skin, 1 medium 	0.1 	4
Lettuce, romaine, raw, shredded, 1 cup 	0.1 	4
Coffee, brewed, 1 cup 	0.1 	4
Shrimp, cooked, 3 ounces 	0.0 	0
Tuna, white, canned in water, drained, 3 ounces 	0.0 	0
Chicken, breast, roasted, 3 ounces 	0.0 	0
Ground beef, cooked, 3 ounces 	0.0 	0
Egg, whole, hard-boiled, 1 large 	0.0 	0
Milk, 1%, 1 cup 	0.0 	0
Yogurt, low-fat, plain, 1 cup 	0.0 	0

*DV = Daily Value. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) developed DVs to help consumers compare the nutrient contents of foods and dietary supplements within the context of a total diet. The DV for manganese is 2.3 mg for adults and children age 4 years and older [17]. FDA does not require food labels to list manganese content unless manganese has been added to the food. Foods providing 20% or more of the DV are considered to be high sources of a nutrient, but foods providing lower percentages of the DV also contribute to a healthful diet.

The U.S. Department of Agriculture’s (USDA's) FoodData Central website [11] lists the nutrient content of many foods and provides a comprehensive list of foods containing manganese ordered by nutrient content.
Dietary supplements

In dietary supplements, manganese is present in many different forms, including amino acid chelates (e.g., manganese bisglycinate chelate, manganese glycinate chelate, and manganese aspartate) [18]. Other forms include manganese gluconate, manganese picolinate, manganese sulfate, manganese citrate, and manganese chloride. No data are available on the relative bioavailability of different forms of supplemental manganese. The Supplement Facts label on a dietary supplement product declares the amount of elemental manganese in the product, not the weight of the entire manganese-containing compound.

Not all multivitamin/mineral supplements contain manganese, but those that do typically provide 1.0 to 4.5 mg manganese [18]. Supplements containing only manganese, or manganese with a few other nutrients, are also available, and most contain 5 to 20 mg manganese. Many dietary supplements that contain manganese are listed in the Dietary Supplement Label Database from the National Institutes of Health [18]. This database contains label information from tens of thousands of dietary supplement products on the market.
Manganese Intakes and Status

Data on manganese intakes are very limited, but they suggest that most people obtain adequate amounts of manganese. The National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, which provides dietary intake data for most nutrients, does not include manganese [19].

The Total Diet Study (TDS) is an FDA program that monitors the nutrient content of typical foods consumed by the U.S population [20]. The most recent report that used TDS data to estimate dietary manganese intakes, published in 1991, used TDS data from 1982 to 1989 [21]. According to this publication, dietary manganese intakes were 1.1 mg/day for infants age 6 to 11 months, 1.48 mg/day for children age 2 years, 1.78 to 2.76 mg/day for boys and girls age 14 to 16 years, 2.14 to 2.23 mg/day for women, and 2.64 to 2.81 mg/day for men [21]. These values met or exceeded the manganese AI for all age groups. More recent data from a population study of 719 adults age 18 to 87 years in northern Italy show a median dietary manganese intake of 2.34 mg/day [22].

Data on manganese intakes from dietary supplements are not currently available.
Manganese Deficiency

Manganese deficiency is very rare in humans, and signs and symptoms of deficiency have not been firmly established [1,2]. The very limited evidence in humans suggests that manganese deficiency might cause bone demineralization and poor growth in children; skin rashes, hair depigmentation, decreased serum cholesterol, and increased alkaline phosphatase activity in men; and altered mood and increased premenstrual pain in women [2,4]. Manganese deficiency might also alter lipid and carbohydrate metabolism and cause abnormal glucose tolerance [3].
Groups at Risk of Manganese Inadequacy

No known groups of people are likely to have inadequate manganese intakes.
Manganese and Health

Because of the role of manganese as a cofactor for several enzymes, low intakes might increase the risk of illness. This section focuses on two health areas in which manganese might be involved: bone health and diabetes.
Bone health

Manganese is a cofactor for several enzymes involved in bone formation [6]. In animals, manganese deficiency can impair bone formation and reduce bone mineral density [23], and manganese supplementation can increase both bone mineral density and bone formation [24].

Scientists have examined whether associations exist between circulating manganese levels, bone mineral density, and osteoporosis in humans, but the evidence is very limited and inconsistent. In one study, 10 women with osteoporosis (mean age, 69.3 years) had lower serum manganese levels (20 mcg/L) than 20 women (mean age, 64.5 years) who did not have osteoporosis (40 mcg/L) [25]. In another study in 40 postmenopausal women, serum manganese levels were positively associated with bone mineral density and negatively associated with bone fracture rates [26]. Conversely, a study in 77 postmenopausal women with osteoporosis (median age 61 years) and 61 postmenopausal women without osteoporosis (median age 60 years) found no differences in red blood cell manganese levels (14.76 mcg/L for women with osteoporosis vs. 15.54 mcg/L for women without osteoporosis) or plasma manganese levels (5.34 mcg/L for women with osteoporosis vs. 5.09 mcg/L for women without osteoporosis) [27]. In addition, no associations between plasma manganese levels and bone mineral density were observed in a study of 90 men age 50 to 80 years [28].

No clinical trials have evaluated the effects of manganese supplementation alone on bone health. In one small clinical trial, supplementation with calcium (1,000 mg) plus trace minerals (5 mg manganese, 15 mg zinc, and 2.5 mg copper) for 2 years improved spinal bone density compared with placebo in 59 healthy postmenopausal women (mean age 66 years) [29]. However, it is not possible to determine to what extent, if any, the manganese alone affected bone density.

More research is needed to determine whether manganese supplementation affects bone health in humans.
Diabetes

As a cofactor for several enzymes, manganese is involved in glucose, carbohydrate, and lipid metabolism, and manganese deficiency might affect carbohydrate metabolism and cause abnormalities in glucose tolerance [3]. Therefore, scientists have examined whether manganese status affects the risk of diabetes.

Several studies have found associations between both increased [30,31] and decreased [32-34] blood levels of manganese and the prevalence of type 2 diabetes [35]. For example, in a case-control study in China of 122 adults with newly diagnosed type 2 diabetes and 429 adults without diabetes (age range for all participants was 40–92 years), those in the highest tertile of plasma manganese (>2.42 mcg/L) were 7.88 times more likely to have diabetes than those in the lowest tertile (<1.67 mcg/L) [30]. Conversely, in a case-control study in Sardinia of 192 adults with type 1 diabetes (mean age 48.8 years), 68 adults with type 2 diabetes (mean age 68.4 years), and 59 adults without diabetes (mean age 57.2 years), median blood concentrations of manganese were lower in those with either type 1 (8.62 mcg/L) or type 2 diabetes (10.7 mcg/L) than in those who did not have diabetes (14.2 mcg/L) [33].

A large case-control study in China suggested a U-shaped association between plasma manganese levels and type 2 diabetes [35]. This study included 1,614 adults with type 2 diabetes (mean age 52.5 years) and 1,614 adults without diabetes (mean age 54.7 years). Compared with the middle tertile of plasma manganese concentration (4.21–6.84 mcg/L), those in the lowest tertile (≤4.21 mcg/L) were 1.89 times more likely, and those in the highest tertile (≥6.84 mcg/L) were 1.56 times more likely, to have type 2 diabetes. Other studies have found no associations between blood manganese levels and diabetes prevalence [36,37].

Research in animals suggests that manganese supplementation might improve glucose tolerance, reduce oxidative stress, and improve endothelial dysfunction in diabetes [3], but clinical trials in humans are lacking. More research is needed to determine whether manganese plays any role in the development of diabetes.
Health Risks from Excessive Manganese

No evidence shows manganese toxicity from high dietary manganese intakes [38]. However, manganese toxicity has occurred in people working in such occupations as welding and mining who were exposed to high amounts of manganese from chronic inhalation of manganese dust [1,39]. People who consume water containing high levels of manganese (in some cases as high as 28 mg/L) have also developed manganese toxicity [4,40].

Manganese toxicity mainly affects the central nervous system and can cause tremors, muscle spasms, tinnitus, hearing loss, and the feeling of being unsteady on one’s feet [1,2]. Additional symptoms include mania, insomnia, depression, delusions, anorexia, headaches, irritability, lower extremity weakness, changes in mood and short-term memory, altered reaction times, and reduced hand-eye coordination [1,39]. These signs and symptoms can progress to neuromotor impairments similar to those associated with Parkinson’s disease, including changes in gait and balance, tremor, and rigidity [1,4].

Iron deficiency increases manganese absorption and can therefore exacerbate symptoms of manganese toxicity [2]. People with chronic liver disease have impaired manganese elimination in bile and are more susceptible to manganese neurotoxicity and other adverse effects of excess manganese intakes [4].

The FNB established manganese ULs for healthy individuals based on levels associated with whole-blood manganese concentrations above the normal range of 4 to 15 mcg/L and risk of neurotoxicity [4]. The ULs do not apply to individuals who are taking supplemental manganese under medical supervision.
Table 3: Tolerable Upper Intake Levels (ULs) for Manganese [4] Age 	Male 	Female 	Pregnancy 	Lactation
Birth to 6 months 	None established* 	None established* 		
7–12 months 	None established* 	None established* 		
1–3 years 	2 mg 	2 mg 		
4–8 years 	3 mg 	3 mg 		
9–13 years 	6 mg 	6 mg 		
14–18 years 	9 mg 	9 mg 	9 mg 	9 mg
19+ years 	11 mg 	11 mg 	11 mg 	11 mg

*Breast milk, formula, and food should be the only sources of manganese for infants.
Interactions with Medications

Manganese is not known to have any clinically relevant interactions with medications.
Manganese and Healthful Diets

The federal government's 2020–2025 Dietary Guidelines for Americans notes that "Because foods provide an array of nutrients and other components that have benefits for health, nutritional needs should be met primarily through foods. ... In some cases, fortified foods and dietary supplements are useful when it is not possible otherwise to meet needs for one or more nutrients (e.g., during specific life stages such as pregnancy)."

For more information about building a healthy dietary pattern, refer to the Dietary Guidelines for Americans and the USDA's MyPlate.

The Dietary Guidelines for Americans describes a healthy dietary pattern as one that

    Includes a variety of vegetables; fruits; grains (at least half whole grains); fat-free and low-fat milk, yogurt, and cheese; and oils.
        Whole grains are rich sources of manganese. Some vegetables and fruits also contain manganese.
    Includes a variety of protein foods such as lean meats; poultry; eggs; seafood; beans, peas, and lentils; nuts and seeds; and soy products.
        Nuts, legumes, and mollusks contain manganese.
    Limits foods and beverages higher in added sugars, saturated fat, and sodium.
    Limits alcoholic beverages.
    Stays within your daily calorie needs.

References

    Buchman AR. Manganese. In: A. Catharine Ross BC, Robert J. Cousins, Katherine L. Tucker, Thomas R. Ziegler ed. Modern Nutrition in Health and Disease. 11th ed. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2014:238-44.
    Nielsen FH. Manganese, Molybdenum, Boron, Chromium, and Other Trace Elements. In: John W. Erdman Jr. IAM, Steven H. Zeisel, ed. Present Knowledge in Nutrition. 10th ed: Wiley-Blackwell; 2012:586-607.
    Li L, Yang X. The Essential Element Manganese, Oxidative Stress, and Metabolic Diseases: Links and Interactions. Oxid Med Cell Longev 2018: 7580707. [PubMed abstract]
    Institute of Medicine. Food and Nutrition Board. Dietary Reference Intakes for Vitamin A, Vitamin K, Arsenic, Boron, Chromium, Copper, Iodine, Iron, Manganese, Molybdenum, Nickel, Silicon, Vanadium, and Zinc Washington, DC: National Academy Press; 2001.
    Aschner JL, Aschner M. Nutritional aspects of manganese homeostasis. Mol Aspects Med 2005;26:353-62. [PubMed abstract]
    Palacios C. The role of nutrients in bone health, from A to Z. Crit Rev Food Sci Nutr 2006;46:621-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Chen P, Bornhorst J, Aschner M. Manganese metabolism in humans. Front Biosci (Landmark Ed) 2018;23:1655-79. [PubMed abstract]
    Greger JL, Davis CD, Suttie JW, Lyle BJ. Intake, serum concentrations, and urinary excretion of manganese by adult males. Am J Clin Nutr 1990;51:457-61. [PubMed abstract]
    Davis CD, Greger JL. Longitudinal changes of manganese-dependent superoxide dismutase and other indexes of manganese and iron status in women. Am J Clin Nutr 1992;55:747-52. [PubMed abstract]
    Ansari TM, Ikram N, Najam-ul-Haq M, Fayyaz I, Fayyaz Q, Ghafoor I, et al. Essential Trace Metal (Zinc, Manganese, Copper and Iron) Levels in Plants of Medicinal Importance. J Biol Sci 2004;4(2):95-9.
    U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service. FoodData Central, 2019.
    Lonnerdal B. Nutritional aspects of soy formula. Acta Paediatr Suppl 1994;402:105-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Davidsson L, Cederblad A, Lonnerdal B, Sandstrom B. Manganese absorption from human milk, cow's milk, and infant formulas in humans. Am J Dis Child 1989;143:823-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Finley JW. Manganese absorption and retention by young women is associated with serum ferritin concentration. Am J Clin Nutr 1999;70:37-43. [PubMed abstract]
    Finley JW, Davis CD. Manganese deficiency and toxicity: are high or low dietary amounts of manganese cause for concern? BioFactors (Oxford, England) 1999;10:15-24. [PubMed abstract]
    Finley JW, Johnson PE, Johnson LK. Sex affects manganese absorption and retention by humans from a diet adequate in manganese. Am J Clin Nutr 1994;60:949-55. [PubMed abstract]
    U. S. Food and Drug Administration. Food Labeling: Revision of the Nutrition and Supplement Facts Labels. 2016.
    National Institutes of Health. Dietary Supplement Label Database. 2018.
    U.S. Department of Agriculture and Agricultural Research Service. What We Eat In America. 2018.
    U. S. Food and Drug Administration. Total Diet Study. 2018.
    Pennington JA, Young BE. Total diet study nutritional elements, 1982-1989. J Am Diet Assoc 1991;91:179-83. [PubMed abstract]
    Filippini T, Cilloni S, Malavolti M, Violi F, Malagoli C, Tesauro M, et al. Dietary intake of cadmium, chromium, copper, manganese, selenium and zinc in a Northern Italy community. J Trace Elem Med Biol 2018;50:508-17. [PubMed abstract]
    Saltman PD, Strause LG. The role of trace minerals in osteoporosis. J Am Coll Nutr 1993;12:384-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Bae YJ, Kim MH. Manganese supplementation improves mineral density of the spine and femur and serum osteocalcin in rats. Biol Trace Elem Res 2008;124:28-34. [PubMed abstract]
    Reginster JY, Strause LG, Saltman P, Franchimont P. Trace elements and postmenopausal osteoporosis: a preliminary study of decreased serum manganese. Med Sci Res 1988;16:337-8.
    Zofkova I, Nemcikova P, Matucha P. Trace elements and bone health. Clin Chem Lab Med 2013;51:1555-61. [PubMed abstract]
    Odabasi E, Turan M, Aydin A, Akay C, Kutlu M. Magnesium, zinc, copper, manganese, and selenium levels in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis. Can magnesium play a key role in osteoporosis? Ann Acad Med Singapore 2008;37:564-7. PMID: 18695768 [PubMed abstract]
    Wang L, Yu H, Yang G, Zhang Y, Wang W, Su T, et al. Correlation between bone mineral density and serum trace element contents of elderly males in Beijing urban area. Int J Clin Exp Med 2015;8:19250-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Strause L, Saltman P, Smith KT, Bracker M, Andon MB. Spinal bone loss in postmenopausal women supplemented with calcium and trace minerals. J Nutr 1994;124:1060-4. [PubMed abstract]
    Li XT, Yu PF, Gao Y, Guo WH, Wang J, Liu X, et al. Association between Plasma Metal Levels and Diabetes Risk: a Case-control Study in China. Biomed Environ Sci 2017;30:482-91. [PubMed abstract]
    Ekin S, Mert N, Gunduz H, Meral I. Serum sialic acid levels and selected mineral status in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Biol Trace Elem Res 2003;94:193-201. [PubMed abstract]
    Kazi TG, Afridi HI, Kazi N, Jamali MK, Arain MB, Jalbani N, et al. Copper, chromium, manganese, iron, nickel, and zinc levels in biological samples of diabetes mellitus patients. Biological trace element research 2008;122:1-18. [PubMed abstract]
    Forte G, Bocca B, Peruzzu A, Tolu F, Asara Y, Farace C, et al. Blood metals concentration in type 1 and type 2 diabetics. Biol Trace Elem Res 2013;156:79-90.
    Hajra B, Orakzai BA, Faryal U, Hassan M, Rasheed S, Wazir S. Insulin Sensitivity To Trace Metals (Chromium, Manganese) In Type 2 Diabetic Patients And Non Diabetic Individuals. J Ayub Med Coll Abbottabad 2016;28:534-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Shan Z, Chen S, Sun T, Luo C, Guo Y, Yu X, et al. U-Shaped Association between Plasma Manganese Levels and Type 2 Diabetes. Environ Health Perspect 2016;124:1876-81. [PubMed abstract]
    Simic A, Hansen AF, Asvold BO, Romundstad PR, Midthjell K, Syversen T, et al. Trace element status in patients with type 2 diabetes in Norway: The HUNT3 Survey. J Trace Elem Med Biol 2017;41:91-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Walter RM, Jr., Uriu-Hare JY, Olin KL, Oster MH, Anawalt BD, Critchfield JW, et al. Copper, zinc, manganese, and magnesium status and complications of diabetes mellitus. Diabetes Care 1991;14:1050-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Finley JW, Penland JG, Pettit RE, Davis CD. Dietary manganese intake and type of lipid do not affect clinical or neuropsychological measures in healthy young women. J Nutr 2003;133:2849-56. [PubMed abstract]
    National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. Welding and Manganese. 2015.
    Kondakis XG, Makris N, Leotsinidis M, Prinou M, Papapetropoulos T. Possible health effects of high manganese concentration in drinking water. Arch Environ Health 1989;44:175-8. [PubMed abstract]

Disclaimer

This fact sheet by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Office of Dietary Supplements (ODS) provides information that should not take the place of medical advice. We encourage you to talk to your health care providers (doctor, registered dietitian, pharmacist, etc.) about your interest in, questions about, or use of dietary supplements and what may be best for your overall health. Any mention in this publication of a specific product or service, or recommendation from an organization or professional society, does not represent an endorsement by ODS of that product, service, or expert advice.

Updated: March 29, 2021


 Molybdenum: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals (original version)
Molybdenum: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals
Table of Contents

    Introduction
    Recommended Intakes
    Sources of Molybdenum
    Molybdenum Intakes and Status
    Molybdenum Deficiency
    Groups at Risk of Molybdenum Inadequacy
    Molybdenum and Health
    Health Risks from Excessive Molybdenum
    Interactions with Medications
    Molybdenum and Healthful Diets
    References
    Disclaimer

Introduction

Molybdenum is an essential trace element that is naturally present in many foods and is also available as a dietary supplement. Molybdenum is a structural constituent of molybdopterin, a cofactor synthesized by the body and required for the function of four enzymes: sulfite oxidase, xanthine oxidase, aldehyde oxidase, and mitochondrial amidoxime reducing component (mARC). These enzymes metabolize sulfur-containing amino acids and heterocyclic compounds including purines and pyrimidines [1,2]. Xanthine oxidase, aldehyde oxidase, and mARC are also involved in metabolizing drugs and toxins [3-6].

Molybdenum appears to be absorbed via a passive nonmediated process, though where absorption occurs in the intestinal tract is not known [1]. Adults absorb 40% to 100% of dietary molybdenum [2,7-10]. Infants absorb almost all of the molybdenum in breast milk or formula [11,12].

The kidneys are the main regulators of molybdenum levels in the body and are responsible for its excretion [1,2]. Molybdenum, in the form of molybdopterin, is stored in the liver, kidney, adrenal glands, and bone [2,7,13].

Because molybdenum deficiency is rare [14], molybdenum status is not assessed in clinical settings. According to a small study of 30 healthy men and women, serum levels of molybdenum range from 0.28 ng/mL to 1.17 ng/mL, and their average is 0.58 ng/mL [15]. In another small study of four healthy young men, plasma levels of molybdenum reached 6.22 ng/mL with a molybdenum intake of 1,490 mcg per day for 24 days [10]. The average concentration of urinary molybdenum is 69 ng/mL, but urinary molybdenum does not reflect molybdenum status [1].
Recommended Intakes

Intake recommendations for molybdenum and other nutrients are provided in the Dietary Reference Intakes (DRIs) developed by the Food and Nutrition Board (FNB) at the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine [1]. DRI is the general term for a set of reference values used for planning and assessing nutrient intakes of healthy people. These values, which vary by age and sex, include the following:

    Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA): Average daily level of intake sufficient to meet the nutrient requirements of nearly all (97%–98%) healthy individuals; often used to plan nutritionally adequate diets for individuals
    Adequate Intake (AI): Intake at this level is assumed to ensure nutritional adequacy; established when evidence is insufficient to develop an RDA
    Estimated Average Requirement (EAR): Average daily level of intake estimated to meet the requirements of 50% of healthy individuals; usually used to assess the nutrient intakes of groups of people and to plan nutritionally adequate diets for them; can also be used to assess the nutrient intakes of individuals
    Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL): Maximum daily intake unlikely to cause adverse health effects

The basis for the EAR for molybdenum consists of two carefully controlled balance studies in a total of eight young men. The EAR for children and adolescents is extrapolated from adult values. Table 1 lists the current RDAs for molybdenum [1].
Table 1: Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDAs) for Molybdenum [1] Age 	Male 	Female 	Pregnancy 	Lactation
Birth to 6 months 	2 mcg* 	2 mcg* 		
7–12 months 	3 mcg* 	3 mcg* 		
1–3 years 	17 mcg 	17 mcg 		
4–8 years 	22 mcg 	22 mcg 		
9–13 years 	34 mcg 	34 mcg 		
14–18 years 	43 mcg 	43 mcg 	50 mcg 	50 mcg
19+ years 	45 mcg 	45 mcg 	50 mcg 	50 mcg
*AI, based on mean molybdenum intakes of infants fed primarily human milk.
 
Sources of Molybdenum
Food

Legumes are the richest sources of molybdenum [16]. Other foods high in molybdenum include whole grains, nuts, and beef liver [1,14,17,18].

The top sources of molybdenum in U.S. diets are legumes, cereal grains, leafy vegetables, beef liver, and milk [17]. Milk and cheese products are the main sources of molybdenum for teens and children [19].

The amount of molybdenum in food depends on the amount of molybdenum in the soil and in the water used for irrigation [1,2]. Drinking water generally contains only small amounts of molybdenum [17]. However, according to 2017 data from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 0.8% of drinking water samples had molybdenum levels above 40 mcg/L [20]. The U.S. Department of Agriculture’s (USDA’s) FoodData Central [21] does not list the molybdenum content of foods or provide lists of foods containing molybdenum. Therefore, the amount of information on molybdenum levels in foods is quite limited.
Table 2: Molybdenum Content of Selected Foods [19] Food 	Micrograms
(mcg) per
serving 	Percent
DV*
Black-eyed peas, boiled, ½ cup 	288 	640
Beef, liver, pan fried, 3 ounces 	104 	231
Lima beans, boiled, ½ cup 	104 	231
Yogurt, plain, low-fat, 1 cup 	26 	58
Milk, 2% milkfat, 1 cup 	22 	49
Potato, baked, flesh and skin, 1 medium 	16 	36
Cheerios cereal, ½ cup 	15 	33
Shredded wheat cereal, ½ cup 	15 	33
Banana, medium 	15 	33
White rice, long grain, cooked, ½ cup 	13 	29
Bread, whole wheat, 1 slice 	12 	27
Peanuts, dry roasted, 1 ounce 	11 	24
Chicken, light meat, roasted, 3 ounces 	9 	20
Egg, large, soft-boiled 	9 	20
Spinach, boiled, ½ cup 	8 	18
Beef, ground, regular, pan fried, 3 ounces 	8 	18
Pecans, dry roasted, 1 ounce 	8 	18
Corn, sweet yellow, cooked, ½ cup 	6 	13
Cheese, cheddar, sharp,1 ounce 	6 	13
Tuna, light, canned in oil, 3 ounces 	5 	11
Potato, boiled without skin, ½ cup 	4 	9
Orange, medium 	4 	9
Green beans, boiled, ½ cup 	3 	7
Carrots, raw, ½ cup 	2 	4
Asparagus, boiled, ½ cup 	2 	4

*DV = Daily Value. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) developed DVs to help consumers compare the nutrient contents of foods and dietary supplements within the context of a total diet. The DV for molybdenum is 45 mcg for adults and children age 4 years and older [22]. FDA does not require food labels to list molybdenum content unless molybdenum has been added to the food. Foods providing 20% or more of the DV are considered to be high sources of a nutrient, but foods providing lower percentages of the DV also contribute to a healthful diet.
Dietary supplements

Molybdenum is available in dietary supplements containing molybdenum only, in combination with other minerals, and in multivitamin/mineral products. Amounts range from about 50 mcg to 500 mcg. Forms of molybdenum in dietary supplements include molybdenum chloride, sodium molybdate, molybdenum glycinate, and molybdenum amino acid chelate [23]. No studies have compared the relative bioavailability of molybdenum from these different forms.
Molybdenum Intakes and Status

Most Americans appear to consume adequate amounts of molybdenum. Although national surveys no longer collect data about molybdenum intake, FDA’s 1984 Total Diet Study estimated that average daily molybdenum intakes from foods were 109 mcg in men and 76 mcg in women [24]. According to the 1988–1994 National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, molybdenum intakes from dietary supplements averaged 23 mcg/day for men and 24 mcg/day for women [25]. Intakes of molybdenum from drinking water collected from the 100 largest cities in the United States are estimated to be about 3 mcg/day based on intakes of 2 liters of water per day [26].
Molybdenum Deficiency

Molybdenum deficiency has not been reported, except in people with a genetic mutation that prevents the synthesis of molybdopterin and therefore of sulfite oxidase [14]. In this rare metabolic disorder, known as molybdenum cofactor deficiency, mutations in one of several genes prevent the biosynthesis of molybdopterin. The absence of molybdopterin impairs the function of enzymes that metabolize sulfite, leading to encephalopathy and seizures [1,14,27-29]; the neurological damage is severe and usually leads to death within days after birth [18,30].

A single reported incident of acquired molybdenum deficiency occurred in 1981 in a patient receiving total parenteral nutrition that was devoid of molybdenum. The patient developed tachycardia, tachypnea, headache, night blindness, and coma. These effects resolved with molybdenum administration [1,31].
Groups at Risk of Molybdenum Inadequacy

No known groups of people are likely to have inadequate molybdenum intakes.
Molybdenum and Health

Molybdenum is not a standard treatment for any disease or disorder.
Health Risks from Excessive Molybdenum

Acute molybdenum toxicity is rare, but it can occur with industrial mining and metalworking exposure. In healthy people, consumption of a diet high in molybdenum usually does not pose a health risk because the molybdenum is rapidly excreted in urine [1,14,18]. One study assessed the effect of high dietary intakes of molybdenum (10–15 mg/day) in an area of Armenia where the soil contains very high levels of molybdenum. The affected individuals experienced achy joints, gout-like symptoms, and abnormally high blood levels of uric acid [14].

Given the absence of human studies, the FNB established ULs for molybdenum for healthy individuals based on levels associated with impaired reproduction and fetal development in rats and mice [1].
Table 3: Tolerable Upper Intake Levels (ULs) for Molybdenum [1] Age 	Male 	Female 	Pregnancy 	Lactation
Birth to 6 months 	None established* 	None established* 		
7–12 months 	None established* 	None established* 		
1–3 years 	300 mcg 	300 mcg 		
4–8 years 	600 mcg 	600 mcg 		
9–13 years 	1,100 mcg 	1,100 mcg 		
14–18 years 	1,700 mcg 	1,700 mcg 	1,700 mcg 	1,700 mcg
19+ years 	2,000 mcg 	2,000 mcg 	2,000 mcg 	2,000 mcg

* Breast milk, formula, and food should be the only sources of molybdenum for infants.
Interactions with Medications

Molybdenum has no known, clinically relevant, interactions with medications.
Molybdenum and Healthful Diets

The federal government's 2020–2025 Dietary Guidelines for Americans notes that "Because foods provide an array of nutrients and other components that have benefits for health, nutritional needs should be met primarily through foods. ... In some cases, fortified foods and dietary supplements are useful when it is not possible otherwise to meet needs for one or more nutrients (e.g., during specific life stages such as pregnancy)."

For more information about building a healthy dietary pattern, refer to the Dietary Guidelines for Americans and the USDA's MyPlate.

The Dietary Guidelines for Americans describes a healthy dietary pattern as one that

    Includes a variety of vegetables; fruits; grains (at least half whole grains); fat-free and low-fat milk, yogurt, and cheese; and oils.
        Whole grains contain molybdenum.
    Includes a variety of protein foods such as lean meats; poultry; eggs; seafood; beans, peas, and lentils; nuts and seeds; and soy products.
        ​​​​​​​Legumes and nuts contain molybdenum.
    Limits foods and beverages higher in added sugars, saturated fat, and sodium.
    Limits alcoholic beverages.
    Stays within your daily calorie needs.

References

    Institute of Medicine. Food and Nutrition Board. Dietary Reference Intakes for Vitamin A, Vitamin K, Arsenic, Boron, Chromium, Copper, Iodine, Iron, Manganese, Molybdenum, Nickel, Silicon, Vanadium, and Zinc. Washington, DC: National Academy Press; 2001.
    Eckhert CD. Trace elements. In: Ross AC, Caballero B, Cousins RJ, et al., eds. Modern Nutrition in Health and Disease. 11th ed. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2014:252-3.
    Beedham C. Molybdenum hydroxylases as drug-metabolizing enzymes. Drug Metab Rev 1985;16:119-56. [PubMed abstract]
    Terao M; Romão MJ, Leimkühler S, et al. Structure and function of mammalian aldehyde oxidases. Arch Toxicol 2016;90:753-80. [PubMed abstract]
    Wahl B, Reichmann D, Niks D, et al. Biochemical and spectroscopic characterization of the human mitochondrial amidoxime reducing components hmARC-1 and hmARC-2 suggests the existence of a new molybdenum enzyme family in eukaryotes. J Biol Chem 2010;285:37847-59. [PubMed abstract]
    Ott G, Havemeyer A, Clement B. The mammalian molybdenum enzymes of mARC. J Biol Inorg Chem 2015;20:265-75. [PubMed abstract]
    Turnlund JR, Keyes WR, Peiffer GL. Molybdenum absorption, excretion, and retention studied with stable isotopes in young men at five intakes of dietary molybdenum. Am J Clin Nutr 1995;62:790-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Werner E, Giussani A, Heinrichs U, et al. 1998. Biokinetic studies in humans with stable isotopes as tracers. Part 2: Uptake of molybdenum from aqueous solutions and labelled foodstuffs. Isotopes Environ Health Stud 34(3):297-301. 10.1080/10256019808234063. [PubMed abstract]
    Novotny JA, Turnlund JR. Molybdenum kinetics in men differ during molybdenum depletion and repletion. J Nutr 2006;136:953-7.
    Novotny JA, Turnlund JR. Molybdenum intake influences molybdenum kinetics in men. J Nutr 2007;137:37-42. [PubMed abstract]
    Sievers E, Dorner K, Garbe-Schonberg D, et al. Molybdenum metabolism: Stable isotope studies in infancy. J Trace Elem Med Biol 2001;15:185-91. [PubMed abstract]
    Sievers E, Oldigs HD, Dorner K, et al. Molybdenum balance studies in premature male infants. Eur J Pediatr 2001;160):109-13. [PubMed abstract]
    Turnlund JR, Keyes WR, Peiffer GL, et al. Molybdenum absorption, excretion, and retention studied with stable isotopes in young men during depletion and repletion. Am J Clin Nutr 1995;61:1102-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Novotny JA. Molybdenum nutriture in humans. J Evid Compl Alt Med 2011;163:164–8.
    Versieck J, Hoste J, Barbier F, et al. Determination of molybdenum in human serum by neutron activation analysis. Clin Chim Acta 1978:87:135-40. [PubMed abstract]
    Tsongas TA, Meglen RR, Walravens PA, et al. Molybdenum in the diet: an estimate of average daily intake in the United States. Am J Clin Nutr 1980;33:1103-7. PMID: 7369160. [PubMed abstract]
    Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry. Division of Toxicology and Human Health Sciences. Environmental Toxicology Branch. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Toxicological profile for molybdenum: draft for public comment. April 2017.
    Otten JJ, Hellwig JP, Meyers LD, eds. Institute of Medicine. Molybdenum. In: Dietary Reference Intakes: The essential guide to nutrient requirements. Washington DC: National Academies Press; 2006:357-61.
    Hunt CD, Meacham SL. Aluminum, boron, calcium, copper, iron, magnesium, manganese, molybdenum, phosphorus, potassium, sodium, and zinc: concentrations in common western foods and estimated daily intakes by infants; toddlers; and male and female adolescents, adults, and seniors in the United States. J Am Diet Assoc 2001;101:1058-60. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. The Third Unregulated Contaminant Monitoring Rule (UCMR 3): Data Summary, January 2017.
    U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service. FoodData Central, 2019.
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Food Labeling: Revision of the Nutrition and Supplement Facts Labels. 2016.
    National Institutes of Health. Dietary Supplement Label Database. 2018.
    Pennington JA, Jones JW. Molybdenum, nickel, cobalt, vanadium, and strontium in total diets. J Am Diet Assoc. 1987 Dec;87(12):1644-50. [PubMed abstract]
    Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. National Health and Nutrition Examiniation Survey (NHANES) III (1988-1994). Bethesda, Md: National Center for Health Statistics; 1996.
    Durfor CN, Becker E. Public water supplies of the 100 largest cities in the United States. U.S. Geological Survey water supply paper 1812. 1964. Washington DC. U.S. Government Printing Office.
    Genetics Home Reference. Molybdenum cofactor deficiency. March 2014.
    Veldman A, Santamaria-Araujo JA, Sollazzo S, Pitt J, et al. Successful treatment of molybdenum cofactor deficiency type A with cPMP. Pediatrics 2010;125:e1249-54. [PubMed abstract]
    Bowhay S. Two years experience of the treatment of molybdenum cofactor deficiency. Arch Dis Child. 2013; 10.1136/archdischild-2013-303935a.26.
    Johnson JL, Wuebbens MM, Mandell R, et al. Molybdenum cofactor biosynthesis in humans. Identification of two complementation groups of cofactor-deficient patients and preliminary characterization of a diffusible molybdopterin precursor. J Clin Invest 1989;83:897-903. [PubMed abstract]
    Abumrad NN, Schneider AJ, Steel D, et al. Amino acid intolerance during prolonged total parenteral nutrition reversed by molybdate therapy. Am J Clin Nutr 1981;34:2551-9. [PubMed abstract]

Disclaimer

This fact sheet by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Office of Dietary Supplements (ODS) provides information that should not take the place of medical advice. We encourage you to talk to your health care providers (doctor, registered dietitian, pharmacist, etc.) about your interest in, questions about, or use of dietary supplements and what may be best for your overall health. Any mention in this publication of a specific product or service, or recommendation from an organization or professional society, does not represent an endorsement by ODS of that product, service, or expert advice.

Updated: March 30, 2021


 Multivitamin/mineral Supplements: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals (original version)
Multivitamin/mineral Supplements: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals
Table of Contents

    Introduction
    Extent of Multivitamin/mineral Use
    Multivitamin/minerals and Health
    Multivitamins/minerals and Use of Supplements Containing Individual Nutrients Found in Multivitamins/minerals
    Safety Issues
    Interactions with Medications
    Choosing a Multivitamin/mineral
    Multivitamins/minerals and Healthful Diets
    References
    Disclaimer

Introduction

People in the United States have taken multivitamin/mineral (MVM) and multivitamin (MV) dietary supplements since the early 1940s, when the first such products became available [1]. MVMs, in particular, are popular supplements, currently taken by an estimated one-third of all adults in the United States, and one-quarter of children and adolescents take an MVM or MV [2,3]. MVMs and MVs accounted for 14% of all purchases of supplements and 38% of all sales of vitamin and mineral supplements in the United States in 2019 [4]. U.S. sales of all dietary supplements totaled an estimated $55.7 billion in 2020, including $21.2 billion for all supplements containing vitamins, minerals, or both, of which $8.0 billion was for MVMs and MVs [4].

MVM and MV supplements have no standard or regulatory definition, such as what nutrients they must contain or in what amounts. Therefore, these terms refer to products that have widely varying compositions [5]. These products go by various names, including multis and multiples, and manufacturers determine the combinations and levels of vitamins, minerals, and other ingredients in them.

Many types of MVMs, the focus of this fact sheet, are available in the marketplace. One way to group them is as follows (Table 1).
Table 1: Types of MVMs Basic (broad spectrum) 	MVMs taken once a day that contain all or most vitamins and minerals, most in amounts that do not exceed the Daily Values (DVs), Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDAs), or Adequate Intakes (AIs) for these nutrients.* This fact sheet focuses primarily on these basic, broad-spectrum MVMs. Formulations for children, adult men and women, pregnant women, and older adults typically provide different amounts of the same vitamins and minerals to meet the needs of these populations.
High potency 	Some MVMs contain amounts of some vitamins and minerals that are substantially higher than the DV, RDA, AI, or even, in some cases, the established Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL).** These MVMs might also include other nutrients and botanical ingredients. Manufacturers sometimes offer these MVMs in packs of two or more pills for users to take daily.
Specialized (condition specific) 	MVMs—such as those for energy, enhanced athletic performance, weight control, improved immune function, or eye health—often combine several vitamins and minerals with botanical and specialty ingredients, such as coenzyme Q10, probiotics, or glucosamine. Some of these products might contain amounts of nutrients that are substantially above the DV, RDA, AI, or even UL.
*The Food and Nutrition Board (FNB) at the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine establishes RDAs and AIs. RDAs are the average daily level of intake of essential nutrients sufficient to meet the requirements of nearly all (97–98%) healthy individuals. These values vary by age, sex, and nutrient. The FNB establishes AIs for nutrients when evidence is insufficient to develop an RDA; intakes at this level are assumed to ensure nutritional adequacy [6]. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) develops DVs to help consumers compare the nutrient contents of foods and dietary supplements within the context of a total diet. The FDA establishes a single DV for each nutrient for adults and children from age 4 years, and the DV is usually one of the highest RDAs or AIs for that nutrient.
** ULs, which the FNB establishes for many nutrients, are the maximum daily intakes unlikely to cause adverse health effects. When intakes exceed the UL, the potential risk of adverse effects increases.

An additional complication for this product category is that many dietary supplements are not labeled as MVMs even though they contain a variety of vitamins and minerals [1]. For example, a manufacturer might label a product containing vitamins C and E, selenium, zinc, and beta-carotene as an antioxidant formula rather than an MVM.

Furthermore, investigators define MVMs differently (or sometimes not at all) in their studies to evaluate the potential health effects of these products. For example, the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, in an evidence-based review of the role of MVMs in chronic disease prevention, defined MVMs as products containing at least three vitamins and minerals in amounts below the UL but no herbs, hormones, or drugs [7]. One team of researchers categorized MVMs more ambiguously as stress-tab-type, therapeutic type, and one-a-day type, so these products probably included MVs as well [8]. Another team defined MVMs as full-spectrum products providing all 12 vitamins plus 10 minerals [9]. Some published reports of studies of dietary supplements use the generic term multivitamins to include products with and without minerals. Various government surveys of dietary supplements and popular food-frequency questionnaires also define MVs and MVMs differently, include different examples, or ask about different products.

Varying definitions of MVMs and the ability of manufacturers to change the composition of their products at will further complicate the study of MVMs' potential health impacts because different studies do not use products of similar composition. Whether studies find any benefits (or risks) of MVMs depends in large part on the combinations and amounts of nutrients in the MVMs used, and these studies' results are not generalizable to the enormous variety of MVMs available in the marketplace.
Extent of Multivitamin/mineral Use

An analysis of dietary supplement use in the United States from the 2017–2018 National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) found that MVMs (defined as products containing three or more vitamins and at least one mineral) were the most commonly consumed supplement. MVMs were taken in the past 30 days by 24.0% of men and women age 20–39 years, 29.8% of those age 40–59 years, and 39.4% of those age 60 and over [10]. Among children and adolescents, MVM use rates were 11.0% for up to 2 years of age, 34.6% for age 2–5 years, 29.5% for age 6–11 years, and 17.3% for age 12–19 years [11]. An earlier analysis of 2011–2014 NHANES data found that 31.2% of the U.S. adult population age 19 years and older reported taking an MVM in the past 30 days [2].

Overall, women are more likely (34.0%) to take an MVM than men (28.3%) [2]. Use rates by sex and age are 19.5% for men and 26.1% for women age 19–30 years, 25.1% for men and 33.0% for women age 31–50 years, 34.5% for men and 36.2% for women age 51–70 years, and 40.9% for men and 44.0% for women age 71 years and older.

MVM use is also more common among the children of women who take supplements; older adults; individuals with more education, a higher income, a healthier lifestyle and diet, and lower body-mass index (BMI); and residents of the western United States [1,2]. MVM use is less common among smokers and members of certain ethnic and racial groups, such as African Americans, Hispanics, and Native Americans, than among Whites.
Multivitamin/minerals and Health

People take MVMs for various reasons. This section summarizes the evidence on the use of MVMs to increase nutrient intakes and to improve health or prevent chronic disease.
Increase nutrient intakes

Taking an MVM increases nutrient intakes and helps people obtain recommended amounts of vitamins and minerals when they do not meet these needs from food alone [9,12].

The FNB notes that RDAs and AIs for nutrients are levels of intake to ingest, on average, each day from the diet [6]. The FNB does not address whether or to what extent nutrient supplements can compensate for dietary inadequacies. Nevertheless, some users consider use of an MVM as a form of dietary or nutritional insurance, a concept first introduced by Miles Laboratories to market its One-A-Day line of nutrient supplements in the 1940s [13].

MVMs can also increase the likelihood that users will have intakes of some nutrients that are higher than the ULs [14]. Excess nutrient intakes are even more likely among MVM users who also take single vitamin and mineral supplements [15].

Results from several studies demonstrate both the use of MVMs for nutritional insurance by some individuals and the potential of MVMs to lead to excessive intakes for others.

In one study, for example, investigators assessed the diets and use of MVMs in a large multiethnic cohort of 90,771 men and women age 45 and older from Los Angeles and Hawaii [16]. The investigators calculated nutrient intakes from participants' diets using a food frequency questionnaire and from MVMs (taken by 23%) using the nutrient composition of two commonly used MVMs. Approximately 74%–76% of the men and 72%–75% of the women had adequate intakes on average from food alone of the 17 nutrients examined, but use of MVMs increased the prevalence of adequacy to 84% for the men and 83% for the women. The greatest improvements in intake were for vitamins A and E and zinc. However, MVM users had excessive intakes of several nutrients; 10%–15% had excessive intakes of vitamin A, iron, and zinc, and 48%–61% had excessive intakes of niacin.

Several studies have found that MVM users tend to have higher micronutrient intakes from their diet alone than nonusers [15]. Ironically, the populations at highest risk of nutritional inadequacy who might benefit the most from MVMs are the least likely to take them [1]. Pregnant and breastfeeding women, adult women, non-Hispanic Blacks, people of low socioeconomic status, and individuals who are underweight or overweight are among the groups with the greatest risk of deficient intakes of one or more nutrients [9].

A cross-sectional analysis of a nationally representative sample of 1,003 pregnant U.S. women age 20 to 40 years from the 2001–2014 NHANES found that many consumed less than recommended amounts of many nutrients from diet alone [17]. Among the 69.8% who took a dietary supplement (most likely a prenatal MVM supplement), the risk of inadequate intakes of many nutrients was lower. For example, 27.7% had inadequate intakes of vitamin A from foods alone, but this rate dropped to 15.5% when supplements were included. However, supplement use increased the proportion of pregnant women with some intakes of iron (27.9%) and folic acid (33.4%) above the UL.

In Canada, almost all prenatal MVM supplements provide 1,000 mcg/day of folic acid. Therefore, the folic acid intakes of pregnant women who take these supplements and consume any foods fortified with this nutrient exceed the UL for this nutrient (1,000 mcg), even though many do not consume recommended amounts of folate from dietary sources alone [18]. Even in the United States, the amount of folic acid in prenatal MVM supplements is typically 800 or 1,000 mcg, which is much higher than the recommended amount (400 mcg) to reduce the risk of neural tube defects in babies [19].
Improve health or prevent chronic disease

Most studies of the potential value of MVMs to enhance health and prevent disease have been observational and compared individuals who chose to take MVM supplements with others who did not take supplements. Because people with healthier diets and lifestyles are more likely to use dietary supplements, attributing health benefits that are distinct from the benefits of healthy behaviors to the use of supplements is difficult [13]. Some studies have suggested potential health benefits or harms from the use of MVMs, but others have found none. Participants in these studies used a wide variety of MVMs containing different combinations and amounts of nutrients.

Clinical trials, where individuals are randomly assigned to take the dietary supplement or a placebo, are better than observational studies for determining whether MVMs might affect disease risk. However, few randomized controlled trials (RCTs) have been conducted because these studies need to be long enough to show effects on disease risk that go beyond simply identifying intermediate biomarkers that might suggest such risk. As with some observational studies, some RCTs have suggested that MVM use has potential health benefits, but others have found no such benefits. However, no two RCTs have used MVMs with the same combinations and amounts of nutrients.
Cancer

Some experts have hypothesized that MVM use might reduce cancer risk or improve cancer outcomes, possibly because certain nutrients in MVMs might inhibit carcinogenesis or tumor progression. Studies of MVMs that have focused on cancer have been observational. They have examined associations between MVM use and overall cancer risk or risk of various types of cancer (including breast, prostate, and colon cancer) as well as associations with cancer-related death.

Evidence on the link between MVM use and cancer risk includes a meta-analysis of eight cohort and case-control studies published before August 2010 that evaluated the association between consumption of MVs and MVMs and breast cancer risk [20]. The studies (which were of low quality overall) included a total of 355,034 women age 20–79; those taking MVs and MVMs took them for at least 3 years. Even after using MVs and MVMs daily for at least 10 years, the women had the same risk of breast cancer as the nonusers. However, one study in this meta-analysis found a 19% higher risk of breast cancer in 25.5% of 35,329 Swedish women who reported taking an MV or MVM (in most cases nutrients in amounts close to RDA levels) than in women who did not take these supplements over an average of 9.5 years [21].

Another large prospective study investigated the association between use of MVs and MVMs (mostly MVMs described as therapeutic or theragran, one-a-day, or stress-tab) and risk of cancer by following 489,640 men and women age 50–71 years for 16 years [8]. Men and women who reported taking more than one MV or MVM daily at the beginning of the study had an 18% lower risk of developing colon cancer than nonusers. Men who took a daily MV or MVM had a 2% higher overall risk of cancer, including a 3% higher risk of prostate cancer, 8% higher risk of lung cancer, and a 16% higher risk of leukemia (which increased to 26% higher if they took more than one MV or MVM daily). Among women, taking a daily MV or MVM did not affect their overall risk of developing cancer except for oropharyngeal cancer, which increased by 46%. Women who took more than one MV or MVM daily had a 53% higher risk of oropharyngeal cancer but a 35% lower risk of leukemia. All results were adjusted to exclude potential confounders, such as the use of single vitamin or mineral supplements.

Studies on the association between MVM use and cancer-related deaths include one that followed 7,728 women in the Women's Health Initiative who had invasive breast cancer for an average of 7.1 years after their diagnosis [22]. At baseline, 37.8% reported taking an MVM (typically containing 20–30 vitamins and minerals). The rate of death from breast cancer (6.7% of the cohort) was 30% lower among the MVM users than nonusers. In addition, a study examined the association between daily MV or MVM use and colon cancer mortality over 16 years in 776,902 men and women, most of whom were White and middle-age or older [23]. During the study, 4,517 died of colon cancer. Use of MVs or MVMs (not further defined) was associated with an 11% lower risk of colon cancer mortality than among nonusers. However, use of MVs or MVMs conferred no protection among participants consuming less than two alcoholic beverages per day, whereas use among those consuming more was associated with a 29% lower risk of colon cancer mortality.
Cardiovascular disease

Some experts have hypothesized that MVM use might reduce the incidence of cardiovascular disease (CVD) or rates of deaths from this disease, possibly because certain nutrients in these products might reduce blood pressure or affect vascular function. Both observational studies and clinical trials have examined this possibility.
Observational studies

Studies that have examined associations of MVMs with CVD risk include the Physicians Health Study I. This study prospectively followed 18,530 male physicians age 40 years and older, of whom 20% reported taking an MV or MVM for an average of 12.2 years [24]. The results showed no significant associations between MV or MVM use and risk of major CVD events, including myocardial infarction (MI), stroke, and CVD death. However, the supplement users had a 14% lower risk of undergoing cardiac revascularization (coronary angioplasty or coronary artery bypass grafting). Furthermore, men who reported using MVs or MVMs for 20 years or more had a lower risk of major CVD events, stroke, ischemic heart disease, and cardiac revascularization than men who did not take MVs or MVMs.

Studies of the association between MVM use and CVD outcomes have focused on several outcomes, including cardiovascular events and mortality. For example, a 2018 meta-analysis of 16 prospective cohort studies (including the study described above and the two below) and two RCTs evaluated the association between use of MVMs (defined as containing more than three vitamins and minerals) and risk of various CVD outcomes, including coronary heart disease and stroke [25]. The studies included a total of 2,019,862 participants with a mean age of 57.8 years and had a mean duration of 11.6 years. Overall, MVM supplementation was not associated with better cardiovascular outcomes, including lower risk of mortality from CVD and coronary heart disease, or of stroke incidence and mortality.

Another study of CVD outcomes in MVM users matched use of MVMs (defined as products containing three or more vitamins and one or more minerals) and MVs among 8,678 adults from NHANES III (1988–1994) with mortality data reported through 2011 [26]. After adjustment for potentially confounding variables (e.g., age, race, BMI, serum lipids, and blood pressure), the use of MVMs for more than 3 years was associated with a substantial 44% reduction in CVD mortality rates among women but not men.

A third CVD outcomes study prospectively followed a cohort of 37,193 women age 45 and older (mean age 54 years) participating in the Women's Health Study who were users (38%) or nonusers (62%) of MVMs (including a wide range of lower-dose vitamins and minerals) for an average of 16.2 years. The study measured rates of major CVD events, including MI, stroke, and CVD death [27]. Neither baseline use nor changes in use of MVMs over time was associated with changes in the long-term risk of major CVD events, MI, stroke, cardiac revascularizations, or death from CVD.
Randomized controlled trials

RCTs have focused primarily on the link between MVM use and CVD (or all-cause mortality) outcomes. One RCT randomized 1,708 participants age 50 years and older who had had an MI at least 6 weeks earlier to take a daily MVM containing 27 nutrients (many in doses higher than recommended amounts) for a median of 31 months (range 13 to 60 months) or a placebo as well as their standard medications. The study's goal was to determine whether the supplement reduced the risk of additional cardiovascular events or death [28]. Participants receiving the supplement did not have significantly fewer cardiovascular events, but this finding should be interpreted with caution because many participants did not take the supplement or placebo as directed, and others withdrew from the study early.

A 2021 meta-analysis of nine RCTs (not including the study described above) evaluated the use of MVMs (defined as products that included most vitamins and minerals) by 22,773 individuals and a variety of CVD outcomes—including total CVD incidence and mortality, MI incidence and mortality, and stroke incidence and mortality—and all-cause mortality [29]. MVM use did not alter the risk of any of these outcomes.
Cataracts and age-related macular degeneration

Several epidemiological studies and small RCTs have suggested associations between higher intakes of antioxidants or zinc and reduced risk of age-related macular degneration (AMD), although not consistently [30].

In the Age-Related Eye Disease Study (AREDS), investigators randomized 4,757 individuals age 55–80 years who had varying degrees of AMD, cataract, or both conditions to receive a placebo or a daily supplement containing high doses of vitamin C (500 mg), vitamin E (400 International Units [IU]), beta-carotene (15 mg), zinc (80 mg), and copper (2 mg) [30,31]. Over an average follow-up period of 6.3 years, the supplements significantly reduced the risk of progression from intermediate to advanced AMD by 28% and reduced rates of loss of visual acuity by 27%. The supplements did not prevent AMD onset or affect cataract risk. A subsequent study, AREDS2, tested whether adding omega-3 fatty acids (containing 650 mg eicosapentaenoic acid [EPA] and 350 mg docosahexaenoic acid [DHA]) or lutein (10 mg) and zeaxanthin (2 mg) to the AREDS formula would make it more effective [32]. This study included 4,203 participants age 50–85 years who had intermediate AMD in both eyes or intermediate AMD in one eye and advanced AMD in the other eye. Adding omega-3 fatty acids, lutein and zeaxanthin, or both to the AREDS formulation did not further reduce the risk of progression to advanced AMD. However, the study showed that beta-carotene was not a required ingredient; the original AREDS formulation without beta-carotene provided the same protective effect on reducing the risk of advanced AMD as the AREDS2 formulation.
Pregnancy and birth outcomes

Dietary supplements are commonly taken during pregnancy to increase nutrient intakes, especially of key nutrients such as iron and folic acid. Some experts have hypothesized that MVM use might increase the chance of a healthy birth outcome.

A meta-analysis of 20 RCTs investigated whether supplementation with MVMs (whose composition varied by study but that contained multiple nutrients including iron and folic acid) by pregnant women led to better birth outcomes than use of supplements containing only iron with or without folic acid or, in one study, a placebo [33]. The trials included 141,849 pregnant women from low- or middle-income countries in Africa and Asia as well as in Mexico (where malnutrition and micronutrient deficiencies are not uncommon); only one of the studies was conducted in a high-income country, the United Kingdom. The use of MVMs resulted in lower odds of low birth weight (less than 2,500 g) by 12%, birth at a smaller size than normal for gestational age by 8%, and premature births (before week 37 of pregnancy) by 10% than use of supplements containing iron with or without folic acid alone or placebo. MVM supplementation did not have a beneficial or harmful effect on risk of stillbirths or of perinatal and neonatal mortality in comparison with iron and folic acid supplementation. The trial in the United Kingdom that compared an MVM to a placebo found no beneficial or harmful effect of the MVM on preterm births, birth at a smaller size than normal gestational age, or low birth weight.

A similar meta-analysis of 13 RCTs investigated whether use by pregnant adolescents and young women age 10–19 years of an MVM (containing multiple nutrients) led to better birth outcomes than supplementation with only iron and folic acid [34]. The trials included a total of 15,283 pregnant adolescents and young women from low- or middle-income countries in Africa and Asia. MVM supplementation resulted in 13% lower odds of low birth weight, 12% lower odds of preterm birth, and 14% lower odds of small size for gestational age than iron and folic acid supplementation alone.
Multiple outcomes

Several studies have evaluated the link between MVM use and many different health outcomes, including cancer, heart disease, osteoporosis, pulmonary diseases, psychiatric disorders, and mortality. Most have not found an effect of MVM use on any of the health outcomes measured.
Observational studies

One of the largest prospective studies of MVM use was the Women's Health Initiative, which evaluated the health of 161,808 postmenopausal women age 50–79 years and their risk factors for cancer, heart disease, and osteoporosis. A total of 41.5% of the women took an MVM (containing 20–30 vitamins and minerals in amounts not exceeding the RDAs), an MV (10 or more vitamins in amounts of 100% or more of the RDA), or a stress multisupplement (containing at least 10 nutrients, some in amounts more than twice the RDA) at least once a week. When the investigators compared the outcomes of supplement users and nonusers, they found no association between use of these products for a median of 8 years and an increased risk of any common cancer or total cancers, CVD, or total mortality [35]. Investigators who followed a multiethnic cohort of 182,099 men and women age 45–75 years living in Hawaii and California for an average 11 years found similar results [36]. Approximately 48% of the men and 52% of the women in this study reported taking an MV or MVM.

Other observational data on multiple outcomes come from a cross-sectional analysis of data from participants in the 2012 National Health Interview Survey. This analysis included 4,933 adults who reported taking an MV or MVM during the previous 12 months and 16,670 nonusers [37]. The supplement users reported better overall health than the nonusers, but the results showed no differences in various psychological, physical, or functional health outcomes [37]. Similarly, in a cohort study of 390,124 healthy U.S. adults (median age 61.5 years) who were followed for up to 27 years, those who reported using MVMs daily did not have a lower risk of mortality from all causes or from heart disease, cancer, or cerebrovascular disease than those who did not use MVMs [38].
Randomized controlled trials

Some evidence from RCTs has focused on the use of MVMs to reduce the risk of various chronic diseases. In 2006, researchers reviewed 63 published RCTs between 1966 and early 2006 that evaluated the potential impacts of MVs and MVMs and individual nutrient supplements on health and on the risk of certain medical conditions (cancer; age-related sensory loss; and cardiovascular, endocrine, neurologic, musculoskeletal, gastroenterologic, renal, and pulmonary diseases) [7]. Use of MVs and MVMs (products containing three or more vitamins and/or minerals in amounts below the ULs and no herbs) did not reduce the risk of any chronic disease. An expert panel that reviewed this report and participated in a state-of-the-science conference on the use of MVs and MVMs for chronic disease prevention at the National Institutes of Health in 2006 concluded that the evidence was insufficient for them to recommend for or against the use of MVs or MVMs to prevent chronic disease [1].

The Physicians Health Study II was the longest clinical trial to investigate whether MVMs might help prevent chronic disease. The study randomly assigned 14,641 male physicians in the United States age 50 and older to take a daily MVM (Centrum Silver) or placebo for a median of 11.2 years. Participants who took the MVM did not have fewer major cardiovascular events, myocardial infarctions, strokes, or cardiovascular-related deaths than nonusers [39]. MVM supplementation modestly but significantly reduced users' risk of developing cancer by 8% but did not reduce the risk of any type of cancer (e.g., of the prostate or colon) or overall cancer mortality [40]. The supplement also had no effect on cognitive decline with age [41]. In addition, the supplement reduced the risk of cataracts by 9% but did not help prevent AMD [42].

The COcoa Supplement and Multivitamin Outcomes Study (COSMOS) was a subsequent clinical trial to investigate whether MVMs might help prevent cancer and CVD in both men and women [43]. This study randomly assigned 8,776 men age 60 years and older and 12,666 women age 65 years and older to take one of the following for a median of 3.6 years: a daily MVM (Centrum Silver, with small differences in ingredients and amounts from the supplement used in the Physicians Health Study II), a cocoa extract containing 500 mg of cocoa flavanols, both Centrum Silver and the cocoa extract, or both placebos. Participants who took the MVM supplement did not show a reduction in total invasive cancers but did have a 38% lower incidence of lung cancer. MVM supplementation did not reduce any cardiovascular events (such as heart attacks or strokes), death from CVD, or all-cause mortality.

An ancillary study to COSMOS, known as COSMOS-Mind, enrolled 2,262 of the older COSMOS participants (mean age 73 years) to investigate whether the cocoa extract, MVM, or both supplements might improve cognition compared with placebo over 3 years of daily use [44]. Participants completed standardized cognitive tests administered over the telephone at baseline and annually for 3 years. Participants who took the MVM supplement, with or without the cocoa extract, showed improved global cognition, which reflects overall ability across multiple cognitive domains, such as recall, recognition, and learning. The improvement was most pronounced in participants with a history of CVD. Participants who took the MVM also showed improved memory and executive function.

Similar findings were reported from COSMOS-Web, another ancillary study to COSMOS that included 3,562 participants (mean age 71 years) who completed computer-based cognitive assessments [45]. In this study, participants who took the MVM had significantly better memory at both 1 year and across 3 years of follow-up, on average, compared with those who took placebo. A third ancillary study, COSMOS-Clinic, included 573 participants (mean age 69 years) who completed in-person, detailed neuropsychological assessments at baseline and year 2 [46]. Compared with participants who took placebo, those who took the MVM showed an improvement in episodic memory over 2 years, but not executive function or attention. In addition, a meta-analysis of the three ancillary studies (COSMOS-Mind, Web, and Clinic) that included more than 5,000 participants showed that MVM use improved global cognition and episodic memory over time [46]. These findings suggest that MVM supplementation can help maintain or enhance cognitive function in older adults.

Other RCTs have evaluated the effects of MVMs on outcomes in individuals with a range of chronic diseases. One RCT conducted in Linxian, China, randomized 3,318 persons age 40–69 years who had precancerous lesions in the esophagus (a relatively common condition in this population, which had a low dietary intake of several nutrients) to receive a daily MVM containing 14 vitamins and 12 minerals in doses two to three times recommended amounts or a placebo for 6 years [47]. The supplement did not reduce incidence or mortality rates for esophageal cancer or the rate of mortality from any cause. After the investigators followed participants for up to 20 additional years, when participants were no longer taking the study supplement, the use of the MVMs during the RCT did not result in lower rates of total mortality or mortality from any cause of death examined, including cancer, heart disease, and stroke [48].

One meta-analysis of 21 RCTs investigated whether daily use of MVs and MVMs (products containing three or more nutrients) for at least 1 year affected mortality risk [49]. The studies included a total of 91,074 healthy adults (average age 62 years) taking the MVs or MVMs for an average of 43 months, and the investigators reported 8,794 deaths. The products provided an average of 14 nutrients, although the products with three nutrients in five trials did not contain a mineral. The use of MVs or MVMs had no effect on all-cause mortality or on mortality due to CVD or cancer.

A review of 16 RCTs of MVs and MVMs (containing more than four nutrients including, in most cases, at least one mineral) in 1,719 participants who had at least one of six types of psychiatric symptoms (depression, post-disaster stress, antisocial behavior, behavioral deficits in dementia, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, or autism) found that the supplements provided no clear reduction in symptoms [50]. However, the quality of the studies was generally poor, most had small samples (as few as 20 participants), and they used different MVs and MVMs and outcome measures.

One well-known trial of the impact of MVMs on both chronic disease risk and mortality used combinations of antioxidant nutrients. In the French Supplémentation en Vitamines et Minéraux Antioxydants (SU.VI.MAX) study, investigators randomly assigned 13,017 adults age 35–60 years to receive a placebo or a daily supplement containing moderate amounts of vitamin C (120 mg), vitamin E (30 mg), beta-carotene (6 mg), selenium (100 mcg), and zinc (20 mg) [51]. After 7.5 years of use, the supplements lowered total cancer incidence by 31% and all-cause mortality rates by 37% in men but not women. The supplements provided no protection from CVD.
Multivitamins/minerals and Use of Supplements Containing Individual Nutrients Found in Multivitamins/minerals

Overall, MVMs do not appear to reliably reduce the risk of chronic diseases when people choose to take these products for up to a decade (or more) or when studies randomize people to take them as part of a clinical trial. An evidence review commissioned by the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) included 78 RCTs with 324,837 participants and six cohort studies with 390,689 participants [52]. It concluded that vitamin and mineral supplements had little or no benefit in preventing cancer, CVD, and death, except that MVMs may provide a small benefit against cancer. Based on this review, the USPSTF concluded there was insufficient evidence to determine the balance of benefits and harms in taking MVMs to prevent CVD or cancer [53]. The American Institute for Cancer Research recommends against taking dietary supplements for cancer prevention because supplements do not provide the same benefits as eating whole foods [54]. Similarly, the American Heart Association advises against the use of MVMs to prevent CVD because scientific studies have found them to be of no value for this purpose [55].

Although MVM use might not reduce overall chronic disease risk, these supplements or several nutrients they contain might benefit certain groups of people. Examples of these populations are described below.
Women who could become pregnant

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends that women, including adolescents, who are capable of becoming pregnant consume 400 mcg/day of folic acid from fortified foods, dietary supplements, or both [6,56]. Obtaining sufficient amounts of folic acid in the periconceptual period reduces the risk of neural tube defects in newborns. The Dietary Guidelines for Americans 2020–2025 (DGA) notes that the critical period for folic acid supplementation to prevent neural tube defects starts at least 1 month before conception and continues through the first 2 to 3 months of pregnancy [57]. The USPSTF advises women, including adolescents, who are planning to become or capable of becoming pregnant to take a dietary supplement providing 400 to 800 mcg/day of folic acid daily [58].
Pregnant women

The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists recommends that pregnant women take a daily prenatal vitamin [59]. Acknowledging that most health care providers recommend taking a daily prenatal MVM during pregnancy, the DGA states that this practice may be necessary to meet the needs for folate or folic acid, iron, iodine, and vitamin D during pregnancy [57]. The DGA also states that pregnant women might need to take separate supplements of iodine and choline when their health care provider recommends that they do so because many prenatal MVMs do not contain these nutrients or contain only small amounts. The report recommends that women who follow a vegetarian or vegan diet consult their health care provider about whether they need supplementation with iron, vitamin B12, and other nutrients (e.g., choline, iodine, EPA, and DHA). The World Health Organization recommends iron and folic acid supplementation throughout pregnancy [60].
Infants and children

Because breastmilk provides little vitamin D, the American Academy of Pediatrics recommends that exclusively and partially breastfed infants receive supplements of 400 IU (10 mcg)/day of vitamin D beginning in the first few days after birth and continued until the infant is weaned and drinks at least 1 liter or 1 quart of vitamin D-fortified formula or whole milk daily [61]. The academy also recommends that non-breastfed infants and older children who consume less than 1 liter of vitamin D-fortified formula or milk receive 400 IU (10 mcg) supplemental vitamin D daily. The FNB and DGA agree that fully and partially breastfed infants should receive a supplement containing approximately 400 IU (10 mcg)/day vitamin D beginning in the first week of life [57,62]. The American Academy of Pediatrics adds that all non-breastfed infants ingesting less than 1,000 mL/day of vitamin D–fortified formula or milk should receive a supplement containing 400 IU (10 mcg)/day vitamin D [61]. The DGA, noting the difficulty of obtaining sufficient vitamin D from foods, advises that young children might need to continue taking a vitamin D supplement after age 12 months [57]. The DGA adds that infants fed human milk might also require a vitamin B12 supplement if the mother’s vitamin B12 status is inadequate, which might occur, for example, if she follows a vegan diet [57].
Adults age 50 and older

The FNB advises people older than 50 years to obtain recommended amounts of vitamin B12, mainly from fortified foods or dietary supplements. Adults in this age group might not be able to absorb enough of the protein-bound, naturally occurring vitamin B12 in food because gastric acidity tends to decline and atrophic gastritis tends to become more common with age [6]. The DGA also recommends obtaining recommended amounts of vitamin B12 primarily from fortified foods or dietary supplements, but only for people age 60 and older. The DGA adds that the use of some medications (such as proton pump inhibitors) can decrease absorption of vitamin B12 in foods [57].

Findings from three ancillary studies to the COSMOS clinical trial that included more than 5,000 older adults (mean age 69 to 73 years) suggest that taking an MVM for 1 to 3 years can help maintain or enhance cognitive function [46].
Others

Individuals who have poor nutrient intakes from diet alone, consume low-calorie diets, or avoid certain foods (such as strict vegetarians and vegans) might benefit from taking an MVM [63]. Health care providers sometimes prescribe MVMs for people who have medical conditions and diseases that impair digestion, absorption, or use of nutrients.

No U.S. government health agency, private health group, or health professional organization promotes regular use of MVMs. In general, MVMs might help people who do not eat a variety of nutritious foods to obtain adequate amounts of essential nutrients. However, MVMs cannot take the place of the variety of foods that are important to a healthy diet, because foods provide other nutrients and components that have benefits for health.
Safety Issues

Taking a basic MVM that provides nutrients in amounts that are approximately the same as recommended intakes should be safe for healthy people. Studies of MVM users reveal no adverse effects, except that both treatment and placebo groups in some studies experienced some minor gastrointestinal issues [64]. However, individuals who take MVMs and other supplements and who consume fortified foods and beverages might obtain some nutrients in amounts exceeding the UL, increasing the possibility of adverse effects [65]. Excess intakes can also be a concern for people taking MVMs that contain some vitamins or minerals in amounts approaching or exceeding the UL.

Smokers and, possibly, former smokers should avoid MVM products providing large amounts of beta-carotene or vitamin A because two studies have linked these nutrients to an increased risk of lung cancer in smokers [66]. In one RCT of 29,133 male Finnish smokers, those who took supplemental beta-carotene (20 mg/day), with or without vitamin E (50 mg/day as dl-alpha tocopheryl acetate), had an 18% higher incidence of lung cancer during 5–8 years of follow-up than smokers who took a placebo or vitamin E [67]. In another RCT of 18,314, smokers, former smokers, and asbestos-exposed persons, participants who took a combination of 30 mg/day of beta-carotene plus 25,000 IU/day of vitamin A (as retinol) had a 28% higher lung cancer risk than those taking a placebo after an average 4-year follow-up period [68]. Based on these two trials, the USPSTF warned that beta-carotene supplementation may increase the risk of lung cancer in people who smoke, have smoked, or have occupational exposure to asbestos [53]. The USPSTF also noted that beta-carotene supplementation may increase the risk of mortality from CVD.

Taking excess vitamin A (as retinol or other preformed forms of vitamin A but not beta-carotene) during pregnancy can increase the risk of birth defects in infants. The UL for vitamin A during pregnancy is 2,800 mcg/day for adolescents and 3,000 mcg/day for women [69].
Interactions with Medications

MVMs providing nutrients in recommended amounts do not ordinarily interact with medications, with one important exception. People who take certain blood thinners, such as warfarin (Coumadin, Jantoven), should talk with their health care providers before taking any MVM or dietary supplement containing vitamin K [70,71]. Vitamin K is involved in blood clotting and decreases the effectiveness of warfarin and similar drugs. Health care providers determine the dose of this medication for a given patient in part by assessing the amount of vitamin K that the patient routinely consumes.
Choosing a Multivitamin/mineral

Basic MVMs contain both vitamins and minerals, most in amounts that do not exceed the DVs. However, MVMs often have small amounts of certain nutrients, such as calcium, magnesium, and potassium, so supplement users should check product labels. When choosing an MVM product, consumers should consider taking a product designed for people of their age, sex, and life stage (e.g., pregnancy). MVMs for older adults (sometimes called senior or 50+ formulations), for example, often contain little or no iron and more calcium, vitamin D, and vitamin B12 than MVMs for younger adults [72]. Prenatal supplements generally provide no vitamin A in the form of retinol, and most children’s MVMs provide age-appropriate amounts of nutrients.
Multivitamins/minerals and Healthful Diets

According to the federal government’s 2020–2025 DGA, "Because foods provide an array of nutrients and other components that have benefits for health, nutritional needs should be met primarily through foods. ... In some cases, fortified foods and dietary supplements are useful when it is not possible otherwise to meet needs for one or more nutrients (e.g., during specific life stages such as pregnancy" [57].

The DGA does not mention MVMs, but it does recommend that Americans choose healthy, nutrient-dense food and beverages. The DGA lists nutrients of special public health concern in American diets, such as calcium, potassium, dietary fiber, and vitamin D in both adults and children. Iron is also a nutrient of public health concern for infants age 6–11 months who are fed primarily human milk and do not consume enough iron from complementary foods, adolescent females, and women who are pregnant. Depending on their formulations, MVMs can help individuals obtain adequate amounts of these nutrients, except for potassium (because MVMs contain only very small amounts of this mineral) and dietary fiber.

For more information about building a healthy dietary pattern refer to the Dietary Guidelines for Americans and the U.S. Department of Agriculture's MyPlate.
References

    NIH State-of-the-Science Panel. National Institutes of Health state-of-the-science conference statement: multivitamin/mineral supplements and chronic disease prevention. Am J Clin Nutr 2007;85:257S-264S. [PubMed abstract]
    Cowan AE, Jun S, Gahche JJ, Tooze JA, Dwyer JT, Eicher-Miller HA, et al. Dietary supplement use differs by socioeconomic and health-related characteristics among U.S. adults, NHANES 2011-2014. Nutrients 2018;10(8). [PubMed abstract]
    Qato DM, Alexander GC, Guadamuz JS, Lindau ST. Prevalence of dietary supplement use in US children and adolescents, 2003-2014. JAMA Pediatr 2018;172:780-2. [PubMed abstract]
    Nutrition Business Journal. Supplement Business Report 2021. Boulder, CO: New Hope Network, 2021.
    Yetley, EA. Multivitamin and multimineral dietary supplements: definitions, characterization, bioavailability, and drug interactions. Am J Clin Nutr 2007;85:269S-276S. [PubMed abstract]
    Otten JJ, Hellwig JP, Meyers LD (editors). Dietary Reference Intakes: The Essential Guide to Nutrient Requirements. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. 2006.
    Huang H-Y, Caballero B, Chang S, Alberg AJ, Semba RD, Schneyer C, et al. Multivitamin/Mineral Supplements and Prevention of Chronic Disease. Evidence Report/Technology Assessment No. 139. (Prepared by The Johns Hopkins University Evidence-based Practice Center under Contract No. 290-02-0018). AHRQ Publication No. 06-E012. Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. May 2006.
    Lim J, Weinstein SJ, Liao LM, Sinha R, Huang J, Albanes D. Multivitamin use and overall and site-specific cancer risks in the National Institutes of Health-AARP Diet and Health Study. J Nutr, 2021. Published online ahead of print. [PubMed abstract]
    Bird JK, Murphy RA, Ciappio ED, McBurney MI. Risk of deficiency in multiple concurrent micronutrients in children and adults in the United States. Nutrients 2017; 9: 655. [PubMed abstract]
    Mishra S, Stierman B, Gahche JJ, Potischman N. Dietary supplement use among adults: United States, 2017-2018. NCHS Data Brief, No 399. Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health Statistics. February 2021.
    Stierman B, Mishra S, Gahche JJ, Potischman N, Hales CM. Dietary supplement use in children and adolescents aged <19 years—United States, 2017-2018. MMWR 2020;69:1557-62. [PubMed abstract]
    Blumberg JB, Bailey RL, Sesso HD, Ulrich CM. The evolving role of multivitamin/multimineral supplement use among adults in the age of personalized nutrition. Nutrients 2018, 10, 248.
    Rosenberg IH. Challenges and opportunities in the translation of the science of vitamins. Am J Clin Nutr 2007;85:325S-7S. [PubMed abstract]
    Blumberg JB, Frei BB, Fulgoni III VL, Weaver CM, Zeisel SH. Impact of frequency of multi-vitamin/multi-mineral supplement intake on nutritional adequacy and nutrient deficiencies in U.S. adults. Nutrients 2017, 9, 849. [PubMed abstract]
    Rock CL. Multivitamin-multimineral supplements: who uses them? Am J Clin Nutr 2007;85:277S-9S. [PubMed abstract]
    Murphy SP, White KK, Park S-Y, Sharma S. Multivitamin-multimineral supplements' effect on total nutrient intake. Am J Clin Nutr 2007;85:280S-4S. [PubMed abstract]
    Bailey RL, Pac SG, Fulgoni III VL, Reidy KC, Catalano PM. Estimation of total usual dietary intakes of pregnant women in the United States. JAMA Network open 2019;2(6):e195967. [PubMed abstract]
    Rose EG, Murphy MSQ, Erwin E, Muldoon KA, Harvey ALJ, White RR, et al. Gestational folate and folic acid intake among women in Canada at higher risk of pre-eclampsia. J Nutr 2021;151:1976-82. [PubMed abstract]
    Saldanha LG, Dwyer JT, Haggans CJ, Mills JL, Potischman N. Perspective: Time to resolve confusion on folate amounts, units, and forms in prenatal supplements. Adv Nutr 2020;11:753-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Chan ALF, Leung HWC, Wang S-F. Multivitamin supplement use and risk of breast cancer: A meta-analysis. Ann Pharmacother 2011;45:476-84. [PubMed abstract]
    Larsson SC, Åkesson A, Bergkvist L, Wolk A. Multivitamin use and breast cancer incidence in a prospective cohort of Swedish women. Am J Clin Nutr 2010;91:1268-1272. [PubMed abstract]
    Wassertheil-Smoller S, McGinn AP, Budrys N, Chlebowski R, Ho GY, Johnson KC, et al. Multivitamin and mineral use and breast cancer mortality in older women with invasive breast cancer in the women's health initiative. Breast Cancer Res Treat 2013;141:495-505. [PubMed abstract]
    Jacobs EA, Connell CJ, Patel AV, Chao A, Rodriguez C, Seymour J, et al. Multivitamin use and colon cancer mortality in the Cancer Prevention Study II cohort (United States). Cancer Causes and Control 2001;12:927-34. [PubMed abstract]
    Rautiainen S, Rist PM, Glynn RJ, Buring JE, Gaziano JM,Sesso HD. Multivitamin use and the risk of cardiovascular disease in men. J Nutr 2016;146:1235-40. [PubMed abstract]
    Kim J, Choi J, Kwon SY, McEvoy JW, Blaha MJ, Blumenthal RS, et al. Association of multivitamin and mineral supplementation and risk of cardiovascular disease. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes 2018; 11(7):e004224. [PubMed abstract]
    Bailey RL, Fakhouri TH, Park Y, Dwyer JT, Thomas PR, Gahche JJ, et al. Multivitamin-mineral use is associated with reduced risk of cardiovascular disease mortality among women in the United States. J Nutr 2015;572-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Rautiainen S, Lee I-M, Rist PM, Gaziano JM, Manson JE, Buring JE, Sesso HD. Multivitamin use and cardiovascular disease in a prospective study of women. Am J Clin Nutr 2015;101:144-52. [PubMed abstract]
    Lamas GA, Boineau R, Goertz C, Mark DB, Rosenberg Y, Stylianou M, et al. Oral high-dose multivitamins and minerals after myocardial infarction. A randomized trial. Ann Intern Med 2013;159:797-805. [PubMed abstract]
    Jenkins DJA, Spence JD, Giovannucci EL, Kim Y-I, Josse RG, Vieth R, et al. Supplemental vitamins and minerals for cardiovascular disease prevention and treatment. J Am Coll Cardiol 2021;77:423-36. [PubMed abstract]
    Age-Related Eye Disease Study Research Group. A randomized, placebo-controlled, clinical trial of high-dose supplementation with vitamins C and E, beta carotene, and zinc for age-related macular degeneration and vision loss: AREDS report no. 8. Arch Ophthalmol 2001;119:1417-36. [PubMed abstract]
    NEI (National Eye Institute). AREDS/AREDS2 clinical trials. 2020.
    Age-Related Eye Disease Study 2 Research Group. Lutein + zeaxanthin and omega-3 fatty acids for age-related macular degeneration: the Age-Related Eye Disease Study 2 (AREDS2) randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2013;309:2005-15. [PubMed abstract]
    Keats EC, Haider BA, Tam E, Bhutta ZA. Multiple-micronutrient supplement for women during pregnancy (review). Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2019, Issue 3. Art. No.: CD004905. [PubMed abstract]
    Keats EC, Akseer N, Thurairajah P, Cousens S, Bhutta ZA, the Global Young Women's Nutrition Investigators' Group. Multiple-micronutrient supplementation in pregnant adolescnts in low- and middle-income countries: A systematic review and meta-analysis of individual participant data. Nutrition Reviews 2021; published online ahead of print. [PubMed abstract]
    Neuhouser ML, Wassertheil-Smoller S, Thomson C, Aragaki A, Anderson GL, Manson JE, et al. Multivitamin use and risk of cancer and cardiovascular disease in the Women's Health Initiative cohorts. Arch Intern Med 2009;169:294-304. [PubMed abstract]
    Park S-Y, Murphy SP, Wilkens LR, Henderson BE, Kolonel LN. Multivitamin use and the risk of mortality and cancer incidence: the Multiethnic Cohort Study. Am J Epidemiol 2011;173:906-14. [PubMed abstract]
    Paranjpe MD, Chin AC, Paranjpe I, Reid NJ, Duy PQ, Wang JK, et al. Self-reported health without clinically measurable benefits among adult users of multivitamin and multimineral supplements: A cross-sectional study. BMJ Open 2020;10:e039119. [PubMed abstract]
    Loftfield E, O'Connell CP, Abnet CC, Graubard BI, Liao LM, et al. Multivitamin Use and Mortality Risk in 3 Prospective US Cohorts. JAMA Netw Open. 2024 Jun 3;7(6):e2418729. [PubMed abstract]
    Sesso HD, Christen WG, Bubes V, Smith JP, MacFadyen J, Schvartz M, et al. Multivitamins in the prevention of cardiovascular disease in men: the Physicians' Health Study II randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2012;308:1751-60. [PubMed abstract]
    Gaziano JM, Sesso HD, Christen WG, Bubes V, Smith JP, MacFadyen J, et al. Multivitamins in the prevention of cancer in men: the Physicians' Health Study II randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2012;308:1871-80. [PubMed abstract]
    Grodstein F, O'Brien J, Kang JH, Dushkes R, Cook NR, Okereke O, et al. Long-term multivitamin supplementation and cognitive function in men: A randomized trial. Ann Intern Med 2013;159:806-14. [PubMed abstract]
    Christen WG, Glynn RJ, Manson JE, MacFadyen J, Bubes V, Schwartz M, et al. Effects of multivitamin supplement on cataract and age-related macular degeneration in a randomized trial of male physicians. Ophthalmology 2014;121:525-34. [PubMed abstract]
    Sesso HD, Rist PM, Aragaki AK, Rautiainen S, Johnson LG, Friedenberg G, et al. Multivitamins in the prevention of cancer and cardiovascular disease: The COcoa Supplement and Multivitamin Outcomes Study (COSMOS) randomized clinical trial. Am J Clin Nutr 2022;115:1501-10. [PubMed abstract]
    Baker LD, Manson JE, Rapp SR, Sesso HD, Gaussoin SA, Shumaker SA, et al. Effects of cocoa extract and a multivitamin on cognitive function: A randomized clinical trial. Alzheimer's & Dementia 2022;1-12. [PubMed abstract]
    Yeung LK, Alschuler DM, Wall M, Luttmann-Gibson H, Copeland T, et al. Multivitamin supplementation improves memory in older adults: A randomized clinical trial. Am J Clin Nutr. 2023 May 24:S0002-9165(23)48904-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Vyas CM, Manson JE, Sesso HD, Cook NR, Rist PM, Weinberg A, et al. Effect of multivitamin-mineral supplementation versus placebo on cognitive function: results from the clinic subcohort of the COcoa Supplement and Multivitamin Outcomes Study (COSMOS) randomized clinical trial and meta-analysis of 3 cognitive studies within COSMOS. Am J Clin Nutr. 2024 Jan 18:S0002-9165(23)66342-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Li J-Y, Taylor PR, Li B, Dawsey S, Wang G-Q, Ershow AG, et al. Nutrition intervention trials in Linxian, China: Multiple vitamin/mineral supplementation, cancer incidence, and disease-specific mortality among adults with esophageal dysplasia. J Natl Cancer Inst 1993;85:1492-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Wang J-B, Abnet CC, Fan J-H, Qiao Y-L, Taylor PR. The randomized Linxian dysplasia nutrition intervention trial after 26 years of follow-up: No effect of multivitamin supplementation on mortality. JAMA Intern Med 2013;173:1259-61. [PubMed abstract]
    Macpherson H, Pipingas A, Pase MP. Mutlvitamin-multimineral supplementation and mortality: A meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Am J Clin Nutr 2013;97:437-44. [PubMed abstract]
    Johnstone JM, Hughes A, Goldenberg JZ, Romijn AR, Rucklidge JJ. Multinutrients for the treatment of psychiatric symptoms in clinical samples: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Nutrients 2020;12, 3394. [PubMed abstract]
    Hercberg S, Galan P, Preziosi P, Bertrais S, Mennen L, Malvy D, et al. The SU.VI.MAX study: a randomized, placebo-controlled trial of the health effects of antioxidant vitamins and minerals. Arch Intern Med 2004;164:2335-42. [PubMed abstract]
    O'Connor EA, Evans CV, Ivlev I, Rushkin MC, Thomas RG, Martin A, Lin JS. Vitamin and mineral supplements for the primary prevention of cardiovascular disease and cancer. Updated evidence report and systematic review for the US Preventive Services Task Force. JAMA 2022;327:2334-47. [PubMed abstract]
    US Preventive Services Task Force. Vitamin, mineral, and multivitamin supplementation to prevent cardiovascular disease and cancer. US Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement. JAMA 2022;327:2326-33. [PubMed abstract]
    American Institute for Cancer Research. How to prevent cancer: 10 recommendations. Accessed July 12, 2022.
    American Heart Association. Multivitamins do not promote cardiovascular health. July 10, 2018.
    Centers for Disease Control. Recommendations: Women and folic acid. 2021.
    U.S. Department of Agriculture and U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Dietary Guidelines for Americans, 2020-2025. 9th ed. December 2020.
    U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Folic acid supplementation for the prevention of neural tube defects. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement. JAMA 2017;317:183-9. [PubMed abstract]
    American College of Obstetrics and Gynecologists. Nutrition during pregnancy. March 2021.
    World Health Organization. WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience. 2016.
    Wagner CL, Greer FR, and the Section on Breastfeeding and Committee on Nutrition. Prevention of rickets and vitamin D deficiency in infants, children, and adolescents. Pediatrics 2008;122:1142-52. [PubMed abstract]
    Institute of Medicine], Food and Nutrition Board. Dietary Reference Intakes for Calcium and Vitamin D. Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 2010.
    Marra MV, Bailey RL. Position of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics: Micronutrient supplementation. J Acad Nutr Diet 2018;118:2162-73. [PubMed abstract]
    Biesalski HK, Tinz J. Multivitamin/mineral supplements: Rationale and safety. Nutrition 2017;36:60-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Mulholland CA, Benford DJ. What is known about the safety of multivitamin-multimineral supplements for the generally healthy population? Theoretical basis for harm. Am J Clin Nutr 2007:85:318S-22S. [PubMed abstract]
    Prentice RL. Clinical trials and observational studies to assess the chronic disease benefits and risks of multivitamin-multimineral supplements. Am J Clin Nutr 2007;85:308S-13S. [PubMed abstract]
    Alpha-Tocopherol, Beta-Carotene Cancer Prevention Study Group. The effect of vitamin E and beta carotene on the incidence of lung cancer and other cancers among male smokers. N Engl J Med 1994;330:1029-35. [PubMed abstract]
    Omenn GS, Goodman GE, Thornquist MD, Balmes J, Cullen MR, Glass A, et al. Effects of a combination of beta carotene and vitamin A on lung cancer and cardiovascular disease. N Engl J Med 1996;334:1150-5. [PubMed abstract]
    Institute of Medicine. Dietary Reference Intakes for Vitamin A, Vitamin K, Arsenic, Boron, Chromium, Copper, Iodine, Iron, Manganese, Molybdenum, Nickel, Silicon, Vanadium, and Zinc. Washington, DC: National Academy Press. 2001.
    Natural Medicines Comprehensive Database. Vitamin K. Accessed January 12, 2011.
    American Heart Association. A patient's guide to taking warfarin, September 30, 2016.
    National Institutes of Health. Office of Dietary Supplements. Dietary Supplement Label Database. 2021.

Disclaimer

This fact sheet by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Office of Dietary Supplements (ODS) provides information that should not take the place of medical advice. We encourage you to talk to your health care providers (doctor, registered dietitian, pharmacist, etc.) about your interest in, questions about, or use of dietary supplements and what may be best for your overall health. Any mention in this publication of a specific product or service, or recommendation from an organization or professional society, does not represent an endorsement by ODS of that product, service, or expert advice.

Updated: July 17, 2024


 Pantothenic Acid: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals (original version)
Pantothenic Acid: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals
Table of Contents

    Introduction
    Recommended Intakes
    Pantothenic Acid Intakes and Status
    Pantothenic Acid Deficiency
    Groups at Risk of Pantothenic Acid Inadequacy
    Pantothenic Acid and Health
    Health Risks from Excessive Pantothenic Acid
    Interactions with Medications
    Pantothenic Acid and Healthful Diets
    References
    Disclaimer

Introduction

Pantothenic acid (also known as vitamin B5) is an essential nutrient that is naturally present in some foods, added to others, and available as a dietary supplement. The main function of this water-soluble B vitamin is in the synthesis of coenzyme A (CoA) and acyl carrier protein [1,2]. CoA is essential for fatty acid synthesis and degradation, transfer of acetyl and acyl groups, and a multitude of other anabolic and catabolic processes [3,4]. Acyl carrier protein’s main role is in fatty acid synthesis [2].

A wide variety of plant and animal foods contain pantothenic acid [1]. About 85% of dietary pantothenic acid is in the form of CoA or phosphopantetheine [2,4]. These forms are converted to pantothenic acid by digestive enzymes (nucleosidases, peptidases, and phosphorylases) in the intestinal lumen and intestinal cells. Pantothenic acid is absorbed in the intestine and delivered directly into the bloodstream by active transport (and possibly simple diffusion at higher doses) [1,2,4]. Pantetheine, the dephosphorylated form of phosphopantetheine, however, is first taken up by intestinal cells and converted to pantothenic acid before being delivered into the bloodstream [2]. The intestinal flora also produce pantothenic acid, but its contribution to the total amount of pantothenic acid that the body absorbs is not known [4]. Red blood cells carry pantothenic acid throughout the body [4]. Most pantothenic acid in tissues is in the form of CoA, but smaller amounts are present as acyl carrier protein or free pantothenic acid [1,4].

Pantothenic acid status is not routinely measured in healthy people. Microbiologic growth assays, animal bioassays, and radioimmunoassays can be used to measure pantothenic concentrations in blood, urine, and tissue, but urinary concentrations are the most reliable indicators because of their close relationship with dietary intake [1,4]. With a typical American diet, the urinary excretion rate for pantothenic acid is about 2.6 mg/day [3,5]. Excretion of less than 1 mg pantothenic acid per day suggests deficiency [1,6]. Like urinary concentrations, whole-blood concentrations of pantothenic acid correlate with pantothenic acid intake, but measuring pantothenic acid in whole blood requires enzyme pretreatment to release free pantothenic acid from CoA [1]. Normal blood concentrations of pantothenic acid range from 1.6 to 2.7 mcmol/L, and blood concentrations below 1 mcmol/L are considered low and suggest deficiency [1,4]. Unlike whole-blood concentrations, plasma levels of pantothenic acid do not correlate well with changes in intake or status [1].
Recommended Intakes

Intake recommendations for pantothenic acid and other nutrients are provided in the Dietary Reference Intakes (DRIs) developed by the Food and Nutrition Board (FNB) at the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine [3]. DRI is the general term for a set of reference values used for planning and assessing nutrient intakes of healthy people. These values, which vary by age and sex, include the following:

    Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA): Average daily level of intake sufficient to meet the nutrient requirements of nearly all (97%–98%) healthy individuals; often used to plan nutritionally adequate diets for individuals
    Adequate Intake (AI): Intake at this level is assumed to ensure nutritional adequacy; established when evidence is insufficient to develop an RDA
    Estimated Average Requirement (EAR): Average daily level of intake estimated to meet the requirements of 50% of healthy individuals; usually used to assess the nutrient intakes of groups of people and to plan nutritionally adequate diets for them; can also be used to assess the nutrient intakes of individuals
    Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL): Maximum daily intake unlikely to cause adverse health effects

When the FNB evaluated the available data, it found the data insufficient to derive an EAR for pantothenic acid. Consequently, the FNB established AIs for all ages based on usual pantothenic acid intakes in healthy populations [3]. Table 1 lists the current AIs for pantothenic acid [3].
Table 1: Adequate Intakes (AIs) for Pantothenic Acid [3] Age 	Male 	Female 	Pregnancy 	Lactation
Birth to 6 months 	1.7 mg 	1.7 mg 		
7–12 months 	1.8 mg 	1.8 mg 		
1–3 years 	2 mg 	2 mg 		
4–8 years 	3 mg 	3 mg 		
9–13 years 	4 mg 	4 mg 		
14–18 years 	5 mg 	5 mg 	6 mg 	7 mg
19+ years 	5 mg 	5 mg 	6 mg 	7 mg

Sources of Pantothenic Acid
Food

Almost all plant- and animal-based foods contain pantothenic acid in varying amounts. Some of the richest dietary sources are beef, chicken, organ meats, whole grains, and some vegetables [4]. Pantothenic acid is added to various foods, including some breakfast cereals and beverages (such as energy drinks) [4]. Limited data indicate that the body absorbs 40%–61% (or half, on average) of pantothenic acid from foods [5].

Edible animal and plant tissues contain relatively high concentrations of pantothenic acid. Food processing, however, can cause significant losses of this compound (20% to almost 80%) [1].

Several food sources of pantothenic acid are listed in Table 2.
Table 2: Pantothenic Acid Content of Selected Foods [7] Food 	Milligrams
(mg) per
serving 	Percent
DV*
Beef liver, boiled, 3 ounces 	8.3 	166
Breakfast cereals, fortified with 100% of the DV 	5 	100
Shitake mushrooms, cooked, pieces, ½ cup 	2.6 	52
Sunflower seeds, ¼ cup 	2.4 	48
Chicken, breast meat, skinless, roasted, 3 ounces 	1.3 	26
Tuna, fresh, bluefin, cooked, 3 ounces 	1.2 	24
Avocado, raw, ½  	1.0 	20
Milk, 2% milkfat, 1 cup 	0.9 	18
Mushrooms, white, sliced, stir fried, ½ cup  	0.8 	16
Potatoes, russet, flesh and skin, baked, 1 medium 	0.7 	14
Egg, hard boiled, 1 large 	0.7 	14
Greek yogurt, vanilla, nonfat, 5.3-ounce container 	0.6 	12
Ground beef, 85% lean meat, broiled, 3 ounces 	0.6 	12
Peanuts, roasted in oil, ¼ cup 	0.5 	10
Broccoli, boiled, ½ cup 	0.5 	10
Pita, whole wheat, 1 large 	0.5 	10
Chickpeas, canned, ½ cup 	0.4 	8
Rice, brown, medium grain, cooked, ½ cup 	0.4 	8
Oats, regular and quick, cooked with water, ½ cup 	0.4 	8
Cheese, cheddar, 1.5 ounces 	0.2 	4
Carrots, chopped, raw, ½ cup 	0.2 	4
Cabbage, boiled, ½ cup 	0.1 	2
Clementine, raw, 1  	0.1 	2
Tomatoes, raw, chopped or sliced, ½ cup 	0.1 	2
Cherry tomatoes, raw, ½ cup 	0 	0
Apple, raw, slices, ½ cup 	0 	0

*DV = Daily Value. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) developed DVs to help consumers compare the nutrient contents of foods and dietary supplements within the context of a total diet. The DV for pantothenic acid is 5 mg for adults and children age 4 years and older [8]. FDA does not require food labels to list pantothenic acid content unless pantothenic acid has been added to the food. Foods providing 20% or more of the DV are considered to be high sources of a nutrient, but foods providing lower percentages of the DV also contribute to a healthful diet.

The U.S. Department of Agriculture’s (USDA’s) FoodData Central [7] lists the nutrient content of many foods and provides a comprehensive list of foods containing pantothenic acid arranged by nutrient content.
Dietary supplements

Pantothenic acid is available in dietary supplements containing only pantothenic acid, in combination with other B-complex vitamins, and in some multivitamin/multimineral products [9]. Some supplements contain pantethine (a dimeric form of pantetheine) or more commonly, calcium pantothenate [4,9-11]. No studies have compared the relative bioavailability of pantothenic acid from these different forms. The amount of pantothenic acid in dietary supplements typically ranges from about 10 mg in multivitamin/multimineral products to up to 1,000 mg in supplements of B-complex vitamins or pantothenic acid alone [9].
Pantothenic Acid Intakes and Status

Few data on pantothenic acid intakes in the United States are available. However, a typical mixed diet in the United States provides an estimated daily intake of about 6 mg, suggesting that most people in the United States consume adequate amounts [12]. Some intake information is available from other Western populations. For example, a 1996–1997 study in New Brunswick, Canada, found average daily pantothenic acid intakes of 4.0 mg in women and 5.5 mg in men [13].
Pantothenic Acid Deficiency

Because some pantothenic acid is present in almost all foods, deficiency is rare except in people with severe malnutrition [1,4]. When someone has a pantothenic acid deficiency, it is usually accompanied by deficiencies in other nutrients, making it difficult to identify the effects that are specific to pantothenic acid deficiency [1]. The only individuals known to have developed pantothenic acid deficiency were fed diets containing virtually no pantothenic acid or were taking a pantothenic acid metabolic antagonist [3].

On the basis of the experiences of prisoners of war in World War II and studies of diets lacking pantothenic acid in conjunction with administration of an antagonist of pantothenic acid metabolism, a deficiency is associated with numbness and burning of the hands and feet, headache, fatigue, irritability, restlessness, disturbed sleep, and gastrointestinal disturbances with anorexia [1,4,6,14,15].
Groups at Risk of Pantothenic Acid Inadequacy

The following group is most likely to have inadequate pantothenic acid status.
People with a pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration 2 mutation

Pantothenic acid kinase is an enzyme that is essential for CoA and phosphopantetheine production. It is the principle enzyme associated with the metabolic pathway that is responsible for CoA synthesis. Mutations in the pantothenate kinase 2 (PANK2) gene cause a rare, inherited disorder, pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration (PKAN). PKAN is a type of neurodegeneration associated with brain iron accumulation [4]. A large number of PANK2 mutations reduce the activity of pantothenate kinase 2, potentially decreasing the conversion of pantothenic acid to CoA and thus reducing CoA levels [2].

The manifestations of PKAN can include dystonia (contractions of opposing groups of muscles), spasticity, and pigmentary retinopathy [2,4,16]. Its progression is rapid and leads to significant disability and loss of function [16]. Treatment focuses primarily on reducing symptoms [17]. Whether pantothenate supplementation is beneficial in PKAN is not known, but some anecdotal reports indicate that supplements can reduce symptoms in some patients with atypical PKAN [18].
Pantothenic Acid and Health
Hyperlipidemia

Because of pantothenic acid’s role in triglyceride synthesis and lipoprotein metabolism, experts have hypothesized that pantothenic acid supplementation might reduce lipid levels in patients with hyperlipidemia [19].

Several clinical trials have shown that the form of pantothenic acid known as pantethine reduces lipid levels when taken in large amounts [20], but pantothenic acid itself does not appear to have the same effects [1]. A 2005 review included 28 small clinical trials (average sample size of 22 participants) that examined the effect of pantethine supplements (median daily dose of 900 mg for an average of 12.7 weeks) on serum lipid levels in a total of 646 adults with hyperlipidemia [20]. On average, the supplements were associated with triglyceride declines of 14.2% at 1 month and 32.9% at 4 months. The corresponding declines in total cholesterol were 8.7% and 15.1%, and for low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol were 10.4% and 20.1%. The corresponding increases in high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol were 6.1% and 8.4%.

A few additional clinical trials have assessed pantethine’s effects on lipid levels since the publication of the 2005 review. A double-blind trial in China randomly assigned 216 adults with hypertriglyceridemia (204–576 mg/dl) to supplementation with 400 U/day CoA or 600 mg/day pantethine [21]. All participants also received dietary counseling. Triglyceride levels dropped by a significant 16.5% with pantethine compared with baseline after 8 weeks. Concentrations of total cholesterol and non-HDL cholesterol also declined modestly but significantly from baseline. However, these declines might have been due, at least in part, to the dietary counseling that the participants received.

Two randomized, blinded, placebo-controlled studies by the same research group in a total of 152 adults with low to moderate cardiovascular disease risk found that 600 mg/day pantethine for 8 weeks followed by 900 mg/day for 8 weeks plus a therapeutic lifestyle change diet resulted in small but significant reductions in total cholesterol, LDL cholesterol, and non-HDL cholesterol compared with placebo after 16 weeks [19,22]. Increasing the amount of pantethine from 600 to 900 mg/day did not increase the magnitude of reduction in the lipid measures.

Additional studies are needed to determine whether pantethine supplementation has a beneficial effect on hyperlipidemia independently of, and together with, eating a heart-healthy diet. Research is also needed to determine the mechanisms of pantethine’s effects on lipid levels.
Health Risks from Excessive Pantothenic Acid

The FNB was unable to establish ULs for pantothenic acid because there are no reports of pantothenic acid toxicity in humans at high intakes. Some individuals taking large doses of pantothenic acid supplements (e.g., 10 g/day) develop mild diarrhea and gastrointestinal distress, but the mechanism for this effect is not known [1,23].
Interactions with Medications

Pantothenic acid is not known to have any clinically relevant interactions with medications.
Pantothenic Acid and Healthful Diets

The federal government's 2020–2025 Dietary Guidelines for Americans notes that "Because foods provide an array of nutrients and other components that have benefits for health, nutritional needs should be met primarily through foods. ... In some cases, fortified foods and dietary supplements are useful when it is not possible otherwise to meet needs for one or more nutrients (e.g., during specific life stages such as pregnancy)."

For more information about building a healthy dietary pattern, refer to the Dietary Guidelines for Americans and the USDA's MyPlate.

The Dietary Guidelines for Americans describes a healthy dietary pattern as one that

    Includes a variety of vegetables; fruits; grains (at least half whole grains); fat-free and low-fat milk, yogurt, and cheese; and oils.
        Many vegetables, whole grains, and dairy products contain pantothenic acid.
    Includes a variety of protein foods such as lean meats; poultry; eggs; seafood; beans, peas, and lentils; nuts and seeds; and soy products.
        ​​​​​​​Fish, beef, poultry, eggs, beans, and nuts contain pantothenic acid.
    Limits foods and beverages higher in added sugars, saturated fat, and sodium.
    Limits alcoholic beverages.
    Stays within your daily calorie needs.

References

    Miller JW, Rucker RB. Pantothenic acid. In: Erdman JW, Macdonald IA, Zeisel SH, eds. Present Knowledge in Nutrition. 10th ed. Washington, DC: Wiley-Blackwell; 2012:375-90.
    Sweetman L. Pantothenic acid. In: Coates PM, Betz JM, Blackman MR, et al., eds. Encyclopedia of Dietary Supplements. 2nd ed. London and New York: Informa Healthcare; 2010:604-11.
    Institute of Medicine. Food and Nutrition Board. Dietary Reference Intakes: Thiamin, Riboflavin, Niacin, Vitamin B6, Folate, Vitamin B12, Pantothenic Acid, Biotin, and Choline. Washington, DC: National Academy Press; 1998.
    Trumbo PR. Pantothenic acid. In: Ross AC, Caballero B, Cousins RJ, et al., eds. Modern Nutrition in Health and Disease. 11th ed. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2014:351-7.
    Tarr JB, Tamura T, Stokstad EL. Availability of vitamin B6 and pantothenate in an average American diet in man. Am J Clin Nutr 1981;34:1328-37. [PubMed abstract]
    Hodges RE, Ohlson MA, Bean WB. Pantothenic acid deficiency in man. J Clin Invest 1958;37:1642-57. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service. FoodData Central, 2019.
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Food Labeling: Revision of the Nutrition and Supplement Facts Labels. 2016.
    National Institutes of Health. Dietary Supplement Label Database. 2017.
    Kelly GS. Pantothenic acid. Altern Med Rev 2011;16:263-74. [PubMed abstract]
    Horvath Z, Vecsei L. Current medical aspects of pantethine. Ideggyogy Sz 2009;62:220-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Iyenga GV, Wolfe WR, Tanner JT, et al. Content of minor and trace elements, and organic nutrients in representative mixed total diet composites from the USA. Sci Total Environ 2000;256:215-26. [PubMed abstract]
    Provincial Epidemiology Service, New Brunswick Department of Health and Wellness. New Brunswick nutrition survey; 1997.
    Glusman M. The syndrome of burning feet (nutritional melalgia) as a manifestation of nutritional deficiency. Am J Med 1947;3:211-23. [PubMed abstract]
    Hodges RE, Bean WB, Ohlson MA, et al. Human pantothenic acid deficiency produced by omega-methyl pantothenic acid. J Clin Invest 1959;38:1421-5. [PubMed abstract]
    Hayflick SJ. Defective pantothenate metabolism and neurodegeneration. Biochem Soc Trans 2014;42:1063-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Gregory A, Hayflick SJ. Pantothenate Kinase-Associated Neurodegeneration. In: Adam MP, Ardinger HH, Pagon RA, et al., eds. GeneReviews. Seattle, WA: University of Washington, Seattle; 2017.
    Kurian MA, Hayflick SJ. Pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration (PKAN) and PLA2G6-associated neurodegeneration (PLAN): review of two major neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation (NBIA) phenotypes. Int Rev Neurobiol 2013;110:49-71. [PubMed abstract]
    Rumberger JA, Napolitano J, Azumano I, et al. Pantethine, a derivative of vitamin B(5) used as a nutritional supplement, favorably alters low-density lipoprotein cholesterol metabolism in low- to moderate-cardiovascular risk North American subjects: a triple-blinded placebo and diet-controlled investigation. Nutr Res 2011;31:608-15. [PubMed abstract]
    McRae MP. Treatment of hyperlipoproteinemia with pantethine: A review and analysis of efficacy and tolerability. Nutrition Research 2005;25:319-33.
    Chen YQ, Zhao SP, Zhao YH. Efficacy and tolerability of coenzyme A vs pantethine for the treatment of patients with hyperlipidemia: A randomized, double-blind, multicenter study. J Clin Lipidol 2015;9:692-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Evans M, Rumberger JA, Azumano I, et al. Pantethine, a derivative of vitamin B5, favorably alters total, LDL and non-HDL cholesterol in low to moderate cardiovascular risk subjects eligible for statin therapy: a triple-blinded placebo and diet-controlled investigation. Vasc Health Risk Manag 2014;10:89-100. [PubMed abstract]
    Chawla J, Kvarnberg D. Hydrosoluble vitamins. Handb Clin Neurol 2014;120:891-914. [PubMed abstract]

Disclaimer

This fact sheet by the Office of Dietary Supplements (ODS) provides information that should not take the place of medical advice. We encourage you to talk to your health care providers (doctor, registered dietitian, pharmacist, etc.) about your interest in, questions about, or use of dietary supplements and what may be best for your overall health. Any mention in this publication of a specific product or service, or recommendation from an organization or professional society, does not represent an endorsement by ODS of that product, service, or expert advice.

Updated: March 26, 2021


 Phosphorus: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals (original version)
Phosphorus: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals
Table of Contents

    Introduction
    Recommended Intakes
    Sources of Phosphorus
    Phosphorus Intakes and Status
    Phosphorus Deficiency
    Groups at Risk of Phosphorus Inadequacy
    Phosphorus and Health
    Health Risks from Excessive Phosphorus
    Interactions with Medications
    Phosphorus and Healthful Diets
    References
    Disclaimer

Introduction

Phosphorus, an essential mineral, is naturally present in many foods and available as a dietary supplement. Phosphorus is a component of bones, teeth, DNA, and RNA [1]. In the form of phospholipids, phosphorus is also a component of cell membrane structure and of the body’s key energy source, adenosine triphosphate (ATP). Many proteins and sugars in the body are phosphorylated. In addition, phosphorus plays key roles in regulation of gene transcription, activation of enzymes, maintenance of normal pH in extracellular fluid, and intracellular energy storage. In humans, phosphorus makes up about 1% to 1.4% of fat-free mass. Of this amount, 85% is in bones and teeth, and the other 15% is distributed throughout the blood and soft tissues [1].

Many different types of foods contain phosphorus, mainly in the form of phosphates and phosphate esters [1]. However, phosphorus in seeds and unleavened breads is in the form of phytic acid, the storage form of phosphorus [2]. Because human intestines lack the phytase enzyme, much phosphorus in this form is unavailable for absorption [1]. Phosphorus undergoes passive absorption in the small intestine, although some is absorbed by active transport [2].

Phosphorus and calcium are interrelated because hormones, such as vitamin D and parathyroid hormone (PTH), regulate the metabolism of both minerals. In addition, phosphorus and calcium make up hydroxyapatite, the main structural component in bones and tooth enamel [3]. The combination of high phosphorus intakes with low calcium intakes increases serum PTH levels, but evidence is mixed on whether the increased hormone levels decrease bone mineral density [2,4-6].

The kidneys, bones, and intestines regulate phosphorus homeostasis, which requires maintenance of urinary losses at equivalent levels to net phosphorus absorption and ensuring that equal amounts of phosphorus are deposited and resorbed from bone [1,7,8]. Several hormones, including estrogen and adrenaline, also affect phosphorus homeostasis. When kidney function declines, as in chronic kidney failure, the body cannot excrete phosphate efficiently, and serum levels rise [9].

Although phosphorus status is not typically assessed, phosphate can be measured in both serum and plasma [10]. In adults, normal phosphate concentration in serum or plasma is 2.5 to 4.5 mg/dL (0.81 to 1.45 mmol/L) [10]. Hypophosphatemia is defined as serum phosphate concentrations lower than the low end of the normal range, whereas a concentration higher than the high end of the range indicates hyperphosphatemia. However, plasma and serum phosphate levels do not necessarily reflect whole-body phosphorus content [1,11].
Recommended Intakes

Intake recommendations for phosphorus and other nutrients are provided in the Dietary Reference Intakes (DRIs) developed by the Food and Nutrition Board (FNB) at the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine [12]. DRI is the general term for a set of reference values used for planning and assessing nutrient intakes of healthy people. These values, which vary by age and sex, include the following:

    Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA): Average daily level of intake sufficient to meet the nutrient requirements of nearly all (97%–98%) healthy individuals; often used to plan nutritionally adequate diets for individuals
    Adequate Intake (AI): Intake at this level is assumed to ensure nutritional adequacy; established when evidence is insufficient to develop an RDA
    Estimated Average Requirement (EAR): Average daily level of intake estimated to meet the requirements of 50% of healthy individuals; usually used to assess the nutrient intakes of groups of people and to plan nutritionally adequate diets for them; can also be used to assess the nutrient intakes of individuals
    Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL): Maximum daily intake unlikely to cause adverse health effects

Table 1 lists the current RDAs for phosphorus [2]. For infants from birth to 12 months, the FNB established an AI for phosphorus that is equivalent to the mean intake of phosphorus in healthy, breastfed infants.
Table 1: Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDAs) for Phosphorus [2] Age 	Male 	Female 	Pregnancy 	Lactation
Birth to 6 months* 	100 mg 	100 mg 		
7–12 months* 	275 mg 	275 mg 		
1–3 years 	460 mg 	460 mg 		
4–8 years 	500 mg 	500 mg 		
9–13 years 	1,250 mg 	1,250 mg 		
14–18 years 	1,250 mg 	1,250 mg 	1,250 mg 	1,250 mg
19+ years 	700 mg 	700 mg 	700 mg 	700 mg

*Adequate Intake (AI)
Sources of Phosphorus
Food

Many different types of foods contain phosphorus, including dairy products, meats and poultry, fish, eggs, nuts, legumes, vegetables, and grains [13,14]. In the United States, dairy products contribute about 20% of total phosphorus intakes, and bakery products (e.g., breads, tortillas, and sweet bakery products) contribute 10% [13]. Vegetables and chicken contribute 5% each. The absorption rate for the phosphorus naturally contained in food is 40%–70%; phosphorus from animal sources has a higher absorption rate than that from plants [15,16]. Calcium from foods and supplements can bind to some of the phosphorus in foods and prevent its absorption [1,17]. According to one analysis, a very high calcium intake of 2,500 mg/day binds 0.61–1.05 g phosphorus [17]. In infants, phosphorus bioavailability ranges from 85%–90% for human milk to approximately 59% for soy-based formulas [2].

Phosphate additives (e.g., phosphoric acid, sodium phosphate, and sodium polyphosphate) are present in many foods, especially processed food products. These additives are used for such purposes as preserving moisture or color and enhancing and stabilizing frozen foods [18]. Foods containing these additives have an average of 67 mg more phosphorus per serving than similar foods not containing the additives, and these additives contribute to overall phosphorus intakes in the United States [18,19].

Phosphate additives are estimated to contribute 300 to 1,000 mg to total daily phosphorus intakes [11,20], or about 10%–50% of phosphorus intakes in Western countries [21]. The use of phosphate additives is rising, as are the amounts of these additives in foods [22,23]. The absorption rate for the phosphorus in phosphate additives is approximately 70% [24].

Several food sources of phosphorus are listed in Table 2.
Table 2: Phosphorus Content of Selected Foods [25] Food 	Milligrams
(mg) per
serving 	Percent
DV*
Yogurt, plain, low fat, 6-ounce container 	245 	20
Milk, 2% milkfat, 1 cup 	226 	18
Salmon, Atlantic, farmed, cooked, 3 ounces 	214 	17
Scallops, breaded and fried, 3 ounces 	201 	16
Cheese, mozzarella, part skim, 1.5 ounces 	197 	16
Chicken, breast meat, roasted, 3 ounces 	182 	15
Lentils, boiled, ½ cup 	178 	14
Beef patty, ground, 90% lean meat, broiled, 3 ounces 	172 	14
Cashew nuts, dry roasted, 1 ounce 	139 	11
Potatoes, russet, flesh and skin, baked, 1 medium 	123 	10
Kidney beans, canned, ½ cup 	115 	9
Rice, brown, long grain, cooked, ½ cup 	102 	8
Peas, green, boiled, ½ cup 	94 	8
Oatmeal, cooked with water, ½ cup 	90 	7
Egg, hard boiled, 1 large 	86 	7
Tortillas, corn, 1 medium 	82 	7
Bread, whole wheat, 1 slice 	60 	5
Sesame seeds, 1 tablespoon 	57 	5
Bread, pita, whole wheat, 4-inch pita 	50 	4
Asparagus, boiled, ½ cup 	49 	4
Tomatoes, ripe, chopped, ½ cup 	22 	2
Apple, 1 medium 	20 	2
Cauliflower, boiled, 1” pieces, ½ cup 	20 	2
Beverages, carbonated, cola, 1 cup 	18 	1
Clementine, 1 medium 	16 	1
Tea, green, brewed, 1 cup 	0 	0

*DV = Daily Value. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) developed DVs to help consumers compare the nutrient contents of foods and dietary supplements within the context of a total diet. The DV for phosphorus is 1,250 mg for adults and children age 4 years and older [26]. FDA does not require food labels to list phosphorus content unless phosphorus has been added to the food. Foods providing 20% or more of the DV are considered to be high sources of a nutrient, but foods providing lower percentages of the DV also contribute to a healthful diet.

The U.S. Department of Agriculture’s (USDA’s) FoodData Central [27] lists the nutrient content of many foods and provides a comprehensive list of foods containing phosphorus arranged by nutrient content.
Dietary supplements

Phosphorus is available in dietary supplements containing only phosphorus, supplements containing phosphorus in combination with other ingredients, and a few multivitamin/mineral products [28]. Phosphorus in supplements is usually in the form of phosphate salts (e.g., dipotassium phosphate or disodium phosphate) or phospholipids (e.g., phosphatidylcholine or phosphatidylserine). Products typically provide 10% or less of the DV for phosphorus, but a small proportion deliver more than 100% [28].

The bioavailability of phosphate salts is approximately 70% [15,24]. The bioavailability of other forms of phosphorus in supplements has not been determined in humans.
Phosphorus Intakes and Status

Most Americans consume more than the recommended amounts of phosphorus. Data from the 2015–2016 National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) show that among children and teens age 2–19 years, the average daily phosphorus intake from foods is 1,237 mg [29]. In adults age 20 and older, the average daily phosphorus intake from foods is 1,189 mg for women and 1,596 mg for men.

According to an analysis of 2013–2014 NHANES data, the average daily phosphorus intake from both foods and supplements is 1,301 mg for women and 1,744 mg for men [30]. Some experts question whether the dietary data collection instruments used by NHANES and other large population-based studies capture true dietary phosphorus intakes because these surveys do not account for the additional contributions of phosphate additives in foods [31,32].
Phosphorus Deficiency

Phosphorus deficiency (hypophosphatemia) is rare in the United States and is almost never the result of low dietary intakes [1]. The effects of hypophosphatemia can include anorexia, anemia, proximal muscle weakness, skeletal effects (bone pain, rickets, and osteomalacia), increased infection risk, paresthesias, ataxia, and confusion [1]. In most cases, hypophosphatemia is caused by medical conditions, such as hyperparathyroidism, kidney tubule defects, and diabetic ketoacidosis [33].
Groups at Risk of Phosphorus Inadequacy

The following groups are most likely to have inadequate phosphorus status.
Preterm newborns

Phosphorus deficiency in preterm infants is one of the main causes, along with calcium deficiency, of osteopenia of prematurity (impaired bone mineralization) [34]. Because two-thirds of fetal bone mineral content is acquired during the third trimester of pregnancy, preterm infants are born with low stores of calcium and phosphorus in their bones [35]. The benefits of providing extra phosphorus and calcium for bone health in preterm babies is not clear. However, milk fortified with higher amounts of these minerals and other nutritional components is typically recommended to support overall growth and development [35,36].
People with genetic phosphate regulation disorders

Rare genetic disorders of phosphorus metabolism include X-linked hypophosphatemic rickets [37]. In addition to rickets, patients with this disease develop osteomalacia, pseudofractures (formation of new bone and thickened connective tissue over injured bone), enthesopathy (mineralization of ligaments and tendons), and dental damage. Other rare genetic disorders of phosphorus regulation associated with rickets include autosomal-dominant and autosomal-recessive hypophosphatemic rickets and hereditary hypophosphatemic rickets with hypercalciuria [38]. Treatment typically consists of vitamin D and phosphorus supplementation from diagnosis until growth is complete [39].
Patients with severe malnutrition

People with severe protein or calorie malnutrition can develop refeeding syndrome, also known as refeeding hypophosphatemia, within 2 to 5 days of starting enteral or parenteral nutrition because of the shift in metabolism from a catabolic to an anabolic state [40,41]. Causes of malnutrition that can lead to refeeding syndrome include chronic diseases (e.g., cancer, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, or cirrhosis), very low birthweight, cachexia, low body weight, anorexia nervosa, excessive alcohol intake, and chewing or swallowing problems. The effects of refeeding syndrome can include impaired neuromuscular function, hypoventilation, respiratory failure, impaired blood clotting, confusion, coma, cardiac arrest, congestive heart failure, and death [41]. Prophylactic administration of phosphorus and thiamin in patients at risk of refeeding syndrome can prevent this condition [41].
Phosphorus and Health

This section focuses on two diseases in which phosphorus might play a role: chronic kidney disease (CKD) and cardiovascular disease (CVD).
Chronic kidney disease

CKD, which affects 5%–10% of the population worldwide, can lead to CVD and early death [42]. As kidney function declines, phosphate excretion becomes less efficient and serum phosphate concentration rises. As a result, PTH and fibroblast growth factor 23 lose their ability to suppress phosphorus resorption by the kidneys [43].

Increased phosphorus retention often leads to CKD mineral and bone disorder. This systemic condition is characterized by abnormal metabolism of phosphorus, calcium, PTH, and/or vitamin D; abnormal bone turnover, mineralization, volume, growth, or strength; and vascular or other soft-tissue calcification [44].

An analysis of 2003–2006 NHANES data illustrates the association between CKD and phosphate levels. In 7,895 adults (mean age 47 years, 52% Caucasian), participants with reduced kidney function had significantly higher serum phosphate levels (4.12 mg/dL) than those with normal kidney function (3.83 mg/dL) [45].

Several studies have shown an increased risk of mortality or disease progression in patients who have CKD and high phosphate levels [46-48]. A meta-analysis of nine cohort studies in 199,289 patients age 50–73 years with end-stage renal disease showed, for example, that patients on dialysis with the highest phosphate levels (greater than 5.2–7.5 mg/dL, depending on the study) had a 39% greater risk of all-cause mortality during 12 to 97.6 months of follow-up than those with normal phosphate levels (defined in the analysis as 3.0–5.5 mg/dL, depending on the study) [49].

However, high phosphate levels do not seem to have the same associations in people with milder CKD [50,51]. For example, an analysis of NHANES III (1988–1994) data on 1,105 adults (mean age 67–71 years, depending on their phosphate intake tertile) with moderate CKD found that serum phosphate levels were very similar, regardless of phosphate intake—3.6 mg/dL in the lowest tertile of phosphorus intake (532 mg/day) and 3.5 mg/dL in the highest intake tertile (1,478 mg/day)—and that high phosphorus intakes were not associated with increased mortality rates over 6–12 years, possibly because these patients did not have severe CKD [51].

To prevent the complications of high phosphate levels in patients with CKD, clinicians sometimes encourage patients to limit their phosphorus intakes (e.g., by replacing most animal proteins in their diets with plant-based protein sources, whose phosphorus is less bioavailable) and eat more calcium-rich foods [9,52]. Some evidence shows that replacing foods containing phosphorus additives with foods that lack these additives can reduce serum phosphate levels [53]. However, restricting phosphorus intakes can also reduce protein intakes because many foods (e.g., fish, meats, and legumes) containing large amounts of phosphorus also contain large amounts of protein [54]. Furthermore, a Cochrane Review of nine studies in 634 participants with CKD followed for 1–18 months found only limited, low-quality evidence indicating that dietary interventions might have a positive impact on CKD mineral and bone disorder [43].

In its clinical practice guideline for CKD mineral and bone disorder, the Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes guidelines development group recommends that patients with stage 3–5 (more severe) CKD limit dietary phosphorus intake either alone or in combination with other treatments to reduce phosphate levels [55]. However, the group notes that clinical trial data showing that treatments that lower serum phosphate levels improve patient-centered outcomes are lacking, and it acknowledges that this recommendation is weak.

Additional studies are needed on the link between phosphate concentrations and both CKD risk and morbidity in patients with CKD as well as the impact of dietary phosphorus restriction in patients with this disease.
Cardiovascular disease

Several observational studies support a link between high phosphate levels and CVD risk in people with and without a history of CVD [56,57]. For example, an analysis of 14,675 participants (55% women) without atrial fibrillation found, based on almost 20 years of follow-up, that each 1 mg/dL increase in serum phosphate was associated with a 13% higher risk of atrial fibrillation [58].

Several large epidemiologic studies have also found associations between higher serum phosphate concentrations and risk of cardiovascular mortality in healthy adults. A meta-analysis of data from four prospective cohort studies with 13,515 participants (with percentages of male participants ranging, depending on the study, from 44 to 100% and mean ages from 43 to 74 years) followed for 6–29 years showed a 36% higher risk of cardiovascular mortality in those with the highest phosphate concentration (2.79–4.0 mg/dL) compared with participants with a phosphate concentration of 0.61–3.28 mg/dL [59]. A subsequent study not included in this meta-analysis in 13,165 nonpregnant adult participants (mean age 43–45 years, 52% female) in NHANES III (1988–1994) followed for a median of 14.3 years found that for every 1 mg/dL increase in phosphate above 3.5 mg/dL, the risk of death rose by 35% and the risk of cardiovascular death increased by 45% [60].

Not all observational data, however, support a link between serum phosphate concentrations and CVD risk. A post hoc analysis of data from 7,269 postmenopausal women, mean age 66 years, with osteoporosis found no association between higher serum phosphate levels and risk of cardiovascular outcomes during 4 years of follow-up [61].

In spite of the evidence supporting a link between increased phosphate levels and CVD risk, the literature offers no evidence on whether restricting phosphorus consumption can prevent CVD in healthy adults [62]. Additional research is needed to address this issue.
Health Risks from Excessive Phosphorus

High phosphorus intakes rarely produce adverse effects in healthy people. Although some studies have found associations between high phosphorus intakes (1,000 mg/day or higher) and cardiovascular, kidney, and bone adverse effects as well as an increased risk of death [23,63,66], others have found no link between high intakes and increased disease risk [5,65,66]. The ULs for phosphorus from food and supplements for healthy individuals are therefore based on intakes associated with normal serum phosphate concentrations [2]. The ULs do not apply to individuals who are receiving supplemental phosphorus under medical supervision.
Table 3: Tolerable Upper Intake Levels (ULs) for Phosphorus [2] Age 	Male 	Female 	Pregnancy 	Lactation
Birth to 6 months* 	None established* 	None established* 		
7–12 months* 	None established* 	None established* 		
1–3 years 	3,000 mg 	3,000 mg 		
4–8 years 	3,000 mg 	3,000 mg 		
9–13 years 	4,000 mg 	4,000 mg 		
14–18 years 	4,000 mg 	4,000 mg 	3,500 mg 	4,000 mg
19–50 years 	4,000 mg 	4,000 mg 	3,500 mg 	4,000 mg
51–70 years 	4,000 mg 	4,000 mg 		
71+ years 	3,000 mg 	3,000 mg 		

* Breast milk, formula, and food should be the only sources of phosphorus for infants.

According to one analysis of data on healthy U.S. adults using NHANES III data collected in 1988–1994, high phosphorus intakes (1,000 mg/day or more) were associated with increased rates of all-cause and cardiovascular mortality in adults through 2006 [63]. These intakes are twice the RDA for adults—less than daily intakes in many men (especially those who are white or Hispanic) and well below the UL. The implications of this analysis for the potential adverse effects of high phosphorus intakes are unclear. High phosphorus intakes might be signs of diets that are unhealthy in other ways, for example [63].

Very high phosphorus intakes over short periods (e.g., two 6,600 mg doses of sodium phosphate taken in 1 day) can cause hyperphosphatemia [67,68]. The main effects of hyperphosphatemia include changes in the hormones that regulate calcium metabolism and calcification of nonskeletal tissues, especially in the kidney [2].
Interactions with Medications

Phosphorus can interact with certain medications, and some medications can have an adverse effect on phosphate levels. Two examples are provided below. Individuals taking these and other medications on a regular basis should discuss their phosphorus status with their health care providers.
Antacids

Antacids that contain aluminum hydroxide, such as Maalox HRF and Rulox, bind phosphorus in the intestines, and their chronic use for 3 months or longer can therefore lead to hypophosphatemia [1,69]. These drugs can also aggravate existing phosphate deficiency. Antacids containing calcium carbonate (Rolaids, Tums, Maalox) also decrease instestinal absorption of dietary phosphorus [70].
Laxatives

Some laxatives, such as Fleet Prep Kit #1, contain sodium phosphate, and ingesting these products can increase serum phosphate levels [71]. After 13 reports of deaths associated with taking one dose that was higher than recommended on the label of a laxative containing sodium phosphate, FDA issued a warning that these products are potentially dangerous if more than recommended doses are taken, especially in people with kidney disease, heart disease, or dehydration [72].
Phosphorus and Healthful Diets

The federal government's 2020–2025 Dietary Guidelines for Americans notes that "Because foods provide an array of nutrients and other components that have benefits for health, nutritional needs should be met primarily through foods. ... In some cases, fortified foods and dietary supplements are useful when it is not possible otherwise to meet needs for one or more nutrients (e.g., during specific life stages such as pregnancy)."

For more information about building a healthy dietary pattern, refer to the Dietary Guidelines for Americans and the USDA's MyPlate.

The Dietary Guidelines for Americans describes a healthy dietary pattern as one that

    Includes a variety of vegetables; fruits; grains (at least half whole grains); fat-free and low-fat milk, yogurt, and cheese; and oils.
        Some dairy products are rich in phosphorus, and some vegetables, fruits, and grains contain phosphorus.
    Includes a variety of protein foods such as lean meats; poultry; eggs; seafood; beans, peas, and lentils; nuts and seeds; and soy products.
        Some meats, seafoods, fish, and nuts and seeds are rich in phosphorus or are good sources of the mineral, and other types of meats, fish, and beans contain phosphorus.
    Limits foods and beverages higher in added sugars, saturated fat, and sodium.
    Limits alcoholic beverages.
    Stays within your daily calorie needs.

References

    Heaney RP. Phosphorus. In: Erdman JW, Macdonald IA, Zeisel SH, eds. Present Knowledge in Nutrition. 10th ed. Washington, DC: Wiley-Blackwell; 2012:447-58.
    Institute of Medicine, Food and Nutrition Board. Dietary Reference Intakes for Calcium, Phosphorus, Magnesium, Vitamin D, and Fluoride. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 1997.
    Trautvetter U, Ditscheid B, Jahreis G, Glei M. Habitual intakes, food sources and excretions of phosphorus and calcium in three German study collectives. Nutrients 2018;10. [PubMed abstract]
    Anderson JJB, Adatorwovor R, Roggenkamp K, Suchindran CM. Lack of influence of calcium/phosphorus ratio on hip and lumbar bone mineral density in older Americans: NHANES 2005-2006 cross-sectional data. J Endocr Soc 2017;1:407-14. [PubMed abstract]
    Lee KJ, Kim KS, Kim HN, et al. Association between dietary calcium and phosphorus intakes, dietary calcium/phosphorus ratio and bone mass in the Korean population. Nutr J 2014;13:114.
    Trautvetter U, Jahreis G, Kiehntopf M, Glei M. Consequences of a high phosphorus intake on mineral metabolism and bone remodeling in dependence of calcium intake in healthy subjects - a randomized placebo-controlled human intervention study. Nutr J 2016;15:7. [PubMed abstract]
    Calvo MS, Lamberg-Allardt CJ. Phosphorus. Adv Nutr 2015;6:860-2. [PubMed abstract]
    Lederer E. Regulation of serum phosphate. J Physiol 2014;592:3985-95. [PubMed abstract]
    Calvo MS, Sherman RA, Uribarri J. Dietary phosphate and the forgotten kidney patient: a critical need for FDA regulatory action. Am J Kidney Dis 2019;73:542-51. [PubMed abstract]
    Bazydlo LAL, Needham M, Harris NS. Calcium, Magnesium, and Phosphate. Laboratory Medicine 2014;45:e44-e50.
    EFSA Panel on Dietetic Products N, Allergies. Scientific Opinion on Dietary Reference Values for phosphorus. EFSA Journal 2015;13:4185.
    Institute of Medicine, Food and Nutrition Board. Dietary Reference Intakes for Vitamin A, Vitamin K, Arsenic, Boron, Chromium, Copper, Iodine, Iron, Manganese, Molybdenum, Nickel, Silicon, Vanadium, and Zinc. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2001. [PubMed abstract]
    Moshfegh AJ, Kovalchik AF, Clemens JC. Phosphorus Intake of Americans: What We Eat in American, NHANES 2011-2012. Food Surveys Research Group Dietary Data Brief No. 15. 2016.
    McClure ST, Chang AR, Selvin E, et al. Dietary Sources of Phosphorus among Adults in the United States: Results from NHANES 2001-2014. Nutrients 2017;9. [PubMed abstract]
    Calvo MS, Moshfegh AJ, Tucker KL. Assessing the health impact of phosphorus in the food supply: issues and considerations. Adv Nutr 2014;5:104-13. [PubMed abstract]
    Calvo MS, Uribarri J. The Regulatory Aspects of Phosphorus Intake: Dietary Guidelines and Labeling. In: Uribarri J, Calvo MS, eds. Dietary Phosphorus: Health, Nutrition, and Regulatory Aspects. Boca Raton, Florida: CRC Press; 2018:249-66.
    Heaney RP, Nordin BE. Calcium effects on phosphorus absorption: implications for the prevention and co-therapy of osteoporosis. J Am Coll Nutr 2002;21:239-44. [PubMed abstract]
    Leon JB, Sullivan CM, Sehgal AR. The prevalence of phosphorus-containing food additives in top-selling foods in grocery stores. J Ren Nutr 2013;23:265-70.e2. [PubMed abstract]
    Calvo MS, Uribarri J. Contributions to total phosphorus intake: all sources considered. Semin Dial 2013;26:54-61. [PubMed abstract]
    Calvo MS, Park YK. Changing phosphorus content of the U.S. diet: potential for adverse effects on bone. J Nutr 1996;126:1168S-80S. [PubMed abstract]
    Itkonen ST, Karp HJ, Lamberg-Allardt CJ. Bioavailability of phosphorus. In: Uribarri J, Calvo MS, eds. Dietary Phosphorus: Health, Nutrition, and Regulatory Aspects. Boca Raton, Florida: CRC Press; 2018:221-33.
    Calvo MS, Uribarri J. Phosphorus in the modern food supply: Underestimation of exposure. In: Gutierrez OM, Kalantar-Zadeh K, Mehrotra R, eds. Clinical Aspects of Natural and Added Phosphorus in Foods. New York, New York: Springer-Verlag; 2017:47-76.
    Gutierrez OM, Luzuriaga-McPherson A, Lin Y, et al. Impact of phosphorus-based food additives on bone and mineral metabolism. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2015;100:4264-71. [PubMed abstract]
    Scanni R, vonRotz M, Jehle S, et al. The human response to acute enteral and parenteral phosphate loads. JJ Am Soc Nephrol 2014;25:2730-9. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service. USDA National Nutrient Database for Standard Reference, Legacy Release. Nutrient Data Laboratory Home Page, 2019.
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Food Labeling: Revision of the Nutrition and Supplement Facts Labels. 2016.
    U.S. Department of Agriculture. FoodData Central. 2019.
    National Institutes of Health. Dietary Supplement Label Database. 2019.
    U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service. What We Eat in America, 2015-2016. 2019.
    U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service. What We Eat in America, 2013-2014. 2017.
    Gutierrez OM. The connection between dietary phosphorus, cardiovascular disease, and mortality: where we stand and what we need to know. Adv Nutr 2013;4:723-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Calvo MS, Uribarri J. Public health impact of dietary phosphorus excess on bone and cardiovascular health in the general population. Am J Clin Nutr 2013;98:6-15. [PubMed abstract]
    Hruska K. Overview of phosphorus homeostasis. In: Gutierrez OM, Kalantar-Zadeh K, Mehrotra R, eds. Clinical Aspects of Natural and Added Phosphorus in Foods. New York, New York: Springer-Verlag; 2017:11-28.
    Karpen HE. Mineral homeostasis and effects on bone mineralization in the preterm neonate. Clin Perinatol 2018;45:129-41. [PubMed abstract]
    Harding JE, Wilson J, Brown J. Calcium and phosphorus supplementation of human milk for preterm infants. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2017;2:Cd003310. [PubMed abstract]
    Abrams SA. In utero physiology: role in nutrient delivery and fetal development for calcium, phosphorus, and vitamin D. Am J Clin Nutr 2007;85:604S-7S. [PubMed abstract]
    de Menezes Filho H, de Castro LC, Damiani D. Hypophosphatemic rickets and osteomalacia. Arq Bras Endocrinol Metabol 2006;50:802-13. [PubMed abstract]
    Gattineni J, Baum M. Genetic disorders of phosphate regulation. Pediatr Nephrol 2012;27:1477-87. [PubMed abstract]
    Pavone V, Testa G, Gioitta Iachino S, et al. Hypophosphatemic rickets: etiology, clinical features and treatment. Eur J Orthop Surg Traumatol 2015;25:221-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Parli SE, Ruf KM, Magnuson B. Pathophysiology, treatment, and prevention of fluid and electrolyte abnormalities during refeeding syndrome. J Infus Nurs 2014;37:197-202. [PubMed abstract]
    Friedli N, Stanga Z, Culkin A, et al. Management and prevention of refeeding syndrome in medical inpatients: An evidence-based and consensus-supported algorithm. Nutrition 2018;47:13-20. [PubMed abstract]
    Moe SM, Drüeke T, Lameire N, Eknoyan G. Chronic kidney disease--mineral-bone disorder: a new paradigm. Advances in Chronic Kidney Disease 2007;14:3-12. [PubMed abstract]
    Liu Z, Su G, Guo X, et al. Dietary interventions for mineral and bone disorder in people with chronic kidney disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2015:Cd010350. [PubMed abstract]
    Moe S, Drueke T, Cunningham J, et al. Definition, evaluation, and classification of renal osteodystrophy: a position statement from Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO). Kidney Int 2006;69:1945-53. [PubMed abstract]
    Moore LW, Nolte JV, Gaber AO, Suki WN. Association of dietary phosphate and serum phosphorus concentration by levels of kidney function. Am J Clin Nutr 2015;102:444-53. [PubMed abstract]
    Da J, Xie X, Wolf M, et al. Serum phosphorus and progression of CKD and mortality: a meta-analysis of cohort studies. Am J Kidney Dis 2015;66:258-65. [PubMed abstract]
    Palmer SC, Hayen A, Macaskill P, et al. Serum levels of phosphorus, parathyroid hormone, and calcium and risks of death and cardiovascular disease in individuals with chronic kidney disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Jama 2011;305:1119-27. [PubMed abstract]
    Cheungpasitporn W, Thongprayoon C, Mao MA, et al. Admission serum phosphate levels predict hospital mortality. Hospital Practice 2018;46:121-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Hou Y, Li X, Sun L, Qu Z, Jiang L, Du Y. Phosphorus and mortality risk in end-stage renal disease: A meta-analysis. Clin Chim Acta 2017;474:108-13. [PubMed abstract]
    Selamet U, Tighiouart H, Sarnak MJ, Beck G, Levey AS, Block G, et al. Relationship of dietary phosphate intake with risk of end-stage renal disease and mortality in chronic kidney disease stages 3-5: The Modification of Diet in Renal Disease Study. Kidney Int 2016;89:176-84. [PubMed abstract]
    Murtaugh MA, Filipowicz R, Baird BC, Wei G, Greene T, Beddhu S. Dietary phosphorus intake and mortality in moderate chronic kidney disease: NHANES III. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2012;27:990-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Moorthi RN, Moe SM. Special nutritional needs of chronic kidney disease and end-stage renal disease patients: rationale for the use of plant-based diets. In: Uribarri J, Calvo MS, eds. Dietary Phosphorus: Health, Nutrition, and Regulatory Aspects. Boca Raton, Florida: CRC Press; 2018:235-46.
    de Fornasari ML, Dos Santos Sens YA. Replacing phosphorus-containing food additives with foods without additives reduces phosphatemia in end-stage renal disease patients: a randomized clinical trial. J Ren Nutr 2017;27:97-105. [PubMed abstract]
    Shinaberger CS, Greenland S, Kopple JD, et al. Is controlling phosphorus by decreasing dietary protein intake beneficial or harmful in persons with chronic kidney disease? Am J Clin Nutr 2008;88:1511-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Group KDIGOC-MUW. KDIGO 2017 Clinical Practice Guideline Update for the Diagnosis, Evaluation, Prevention, and Treatment of Chronic Kidney Disease-Mineral and Bone Disorder (CKD-MBD),. Kidney Int Suppl (2011) 2017;7:1-59. [PubMed abstract]
    Dhingra R, Sullivan LM, Fox CS, et al. Relations of serum phosphorus and calcium levels to the incidence of cardiovascular disease in the community. Arch Intern Med 2007;167:879-85. [PubMed abstract]
    Tonelli M, Sacks F, Pfeffer M, et al. Relation between serum phosphate level and cardiovascular event rate in people with coronary disease. Circulation 2005;112:2627-33. [PubMed abstract]
    Lopez FL, Agarwal SK, Grams ME, et al. Relation of serum phosphorus levels to the incidence of atrial fibrillation (from the Atherosclerosis Risk In Communities [ARIC] study). Am J Cardiol 2013;111:857-62. [PubMed abstract]
    Bai W, Li J, Liu J. Serum phosphorus, cardiovascular and all-cause mortality in the general population: A meta-analysis. Clin Chim Acta 2016;461:76-82. [PubMed abstract]
    Chang AR, Grams ME. Serum phosphorus and mortality in the Third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES III): effect modification by fasting. Am J Kidney Dis 2014;64:567-73. [PubMed abstract]
    Slinin Y, Blackwell T, Ishani A, Cummings SR, Ensrud KE. Serum calcium, phosphorus and cardiovascular events in post-menopausal women. Int J Cardiol 2011;149:335-40. [PubMed abstract]
    Menon MC, Ix JH. Dietary phosphorus, serum phosphorus, and cardiovascular disease. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2013;1301:21-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Chang AR, Lazo M, Appel LJ,et al. High dietary phosphorus intake is associated with all-cause mortality: results from NHANES III. Am J Clin Nutr 2014;99:320-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Yamamoto KT, Robinson-Cohen C, de Oliveira MC, et al. Dietary phosphorus is associated with greater left ventricular mass. Kidney Int 2013;83:707-14. [PubMed abstract]
    Chang AR, Miller ER, Anderson CA, et al. Phosphorus additives and albuminuria in early stages of CKD: a randomized controlled trial. Am J Kidney Dis 2017;69:200-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Ito S, Ishida H, Uenishi K, et al. The relationship between habitual dietary phosphorus and calcium intake, and bone mineral density in young Japanese women: a cross-sectional study. Asia Pac J Clin Nutr 2011;20:411-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Beloosesky Y, Grinblat J, Weiss A, et al. Electrolyte disorders following oral sodium phosphate administration for bowel cleansing in elderly patients. JAMA Internal Medicine 2003;163:803-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Malberti F. Hyperphosphataemia: treatment options. Drugs 2013;73:673-88. [PubMed abstract]
    Chines A, Pacifici R. Antacid and sucralfate-induced hypophosphatemic osteomalacia: a case report and review of the literature. Calcif Tissue Int 1990;47:291-5. [PubMed abstract]
    Ruospo M, Palmer SC, Natale P, et al. Phosphate binders for preventing and treating chronic kidney disease-mineral and bone disorder (CKD-MBD). Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2018;8:CD006023. [PubMed abstract]
    Casais MN, Rosa-Diez G, Perez S, et al. Hyperphosphatemia after sodium phosphate laxatives in low risk patients: prospective study. World J Gastroenterol 2009;15:5960-5. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. FDA Drug Safety Communication: FDA warns of possible harm from exceeding recommended dose of over-the-counter sodium phosphate products to treat constipation. 2014.
    U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service. What We Eat in America, 2013-2014. 2017.

Disclaimer

This fact sheet by the Office of Dietary Supplements provides information that should not take the place of medical advice. We encourage you to talk to your health care providers (doctor, registered dietitian, pharmacist, etc.) about your interest in, questions about, or use of dietary supplements and what may be best for your overall health. Any mention in this publication of a specific product or service, or recommendation from an organization or professional society, does not represent an endorsement by ODS of that product, service, or expert advice.

Updated: May 4, 2023


 Potassium: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals (original version)
Potassium: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals
Table of Contents

    Introduction
    Recommended Intakes
    Sources of Potassium
    Potassium Intakes and Status
    Potassium Deficiency
    Groups at Risk of Potassium Inadequacy
    Potassium and Health
    Health Risks from Excessive Potassium
    Interactions with Medications
    Potassium and Healthful Diets
    References
    Disclaimer

Introduction

Potassium, the most abundant intracellular cation, is an essential nutrient that is naturally present in many foods and available as a dietary supplement. Potassium is present in all body tissues and is required for normal cell function because of its role in maintaining intracellular fluid volume and transmembrane electrochemical gradients [1,2]. Potassium has a strong relationship with sodium, the main regulator of extracellular fluid volume, including plasma volume.

The total amount of potassium in the adult body is about 45 millimole (mmol)/kg body weight (about 140 g for a 175 pound adult; 1 mmol = 1 milliequivalent [mEq] or 39.1 mg potassium) [3]. Most potassium resides intracellularly, and a small amount is in extracellular fluid [2-4]. The intracellular concentration of potassium is about 30 times higher than the extracellular concentration, and this difference forms a transmembrane electrochemical gradient that is maintained via the sodium-potassium (Na+/K+) ATPase transporter [4]. In addition to maintaining cellular tonicity, this gradient is required for proper nerve transmission, muscle contraction, and kidney function.

Potassium is absorbed via passive diffusion, primarily in the small intestine [2,4,5]. About 90% of ingested potassium is absorbed and used to maintain its normal intracellular and extracellular concentrations [3,5]. Potassium is excreted primarily in the urine, some is excreted in the stool, and a very small amount is lost in sweat. The kidneys control potassium excretion in response to changes in dietary intakes, and potassium excretion increases rapidly in healthy people after potassium consumption, unless body stores are depleted [2,6]. The kidneys can adapt to variable potassium intakes in healthy individuals, but a minimum of 5 mmol (about 195 mg) potassium is excreted daily in urine [3]. This, combined with other obligatory losses, suggests that potassium balance cannot be achieved with intakes less than about 400–800 mg/day.

Normal serum concentrations of potassium range from about 3.6 to 5.0 mmol/L and are regulated by a variety of mechanisms [3,7]. Diarrhea, vomiting, kidney disease, use of certain medications, and other conditions that alter potassium excretion or cause transcellular potassium shifts can cause hypokalemia (serum levels below 3.6 mmol/L) or hyperkalemia (serum levels above 5.0 mmol/L) [3,5,7,8]. Otherwise, in healthy individuals with normal kidney function, abnormally low or high blood levels of potassium are rare.

Assessing potassium status is not routinely done in clinical practice, and it is difficult to do because most potassium in the body is inside cells. Although blood potassium levels can provide some indication of potassium status, they often correlate poorly with tissue potassium stores [3,9,10]. Other methods to measure potassium status include collecting balance data (measuring net potassium retention and loss); measuring the total amount of potassium or the total amount of exchangeable potassium in the body; and conducting tissue analyses (e.g., muscle biopsies), but all have limitations [9].
Recommended Intakes

Intake recommendations for potassium and other nutrients are provided in the Dietary Reference Intakes (DRIs) developed by expert committees of the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (NASEM) [11]. DRI is the general term for a set of reference values used for planning and assessing nutrient intakes of healthy people. These values, which vary by age and sex, include the following:

    Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA): Average daily level of intake sufficient to meet the nutrient requirements of nearly all (97%–98%) healthy individuals; often used to plan nutritionally adequate diets for individuals
    Adequate Intake (AI): Intake at this level is assumed to ensure nutritional adequacy; established when evidence is insufficient to develop an RDA
    Estimated Average Requirement (EAR): Average daily level of intake estimated to meet the requirements of 50% of healthy individuals; usually used to assess the nutrient intakes of groups of people and to plan nutritionally adequate diets for them; can also be used to assess the nutrient intakes of individuals
    Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL): Maximum daily intake unlikely to cause adverse health effects

In 2019, a NASEM committee updated the DRIs for potassium (and sodium) [11]. The committee found the data insufficient to derive an EAR for potassium. Therefore, they established AIs for all ages based on the highest median potassium intakes in healthy children and adults and on estimates of potassium intakes from breast milk and complementary foods in infants. Table 1 lists the current AIs for potassium for healthy individuals.
Table 1: Adequate Intakes (AIs) for Potassium* [11] Age 	Male 	Female 	Pregnancy 	Lactation
Birth to 6 months 	400 mg 	400 mg 		
7–12 months 	860 mg 	860 mg 		
1–3 years 	2,000 mg 	2,000 mg 		
4–8 years 	2,300 mg 	2,300 mg 		
9–13 years 	2,500 mg 	2,300 mg 		
14–18 years 	3,000 mg 	2,300 mg 	2,600 mg 	2,500 mg
19–50 years 	3,400 mg 	2,600 mg 	2,900 mg 	2,800 mg
51+ years 	3,400 mg 	2,600 mg 		

*The AIs do not apply to individuals with impaired potassium excretion because of medical conditions (e.g., kidney disease) or the use of medications that impair potassium excretion.

The NASEM committee also used an expanded DRI model to include a recommended intake level for a nutrient to reduce the risk of chronic disease, what they termed the chronic disease risk reduction intake (CDRR) [11,12]. According to the model, a CDRR might be set for a nutrient like potassium when there is a causal relationship between a certain level of intake and a reduced risk of chronic disease based on evidence of at least moderate strength. However, the committee found the evidence to be insufficient to derive a CDRR for potassium.
Sources of Potassium
Food

Potassium is found in a wide variety of plant and animal foods and in beverages. Many fruits and vegetables are excellent sources, as are some legumes (e.g., soybeans) and potatoes. Meats, poultry, fish, milk, yogurt, and nuts also contain potassium [3,5]. Among starchy foods, whole-wheat flour and brown rice are much higher in potassium than their refined counterparts, white wheat flour and white rice [13].

Milk, coffee, tea, other nonalcoholic beverages, and potatoes are the top sources of potassium in the diets of U.S. adults [14]. Among children in the United States, milk, fruit juice, potatoes, and fruit are the top sources [15].

It is estimated that the body absorbs about 85%–90% of dietary potassium [1,2]. The forms of potassium in fruits and vegetables include potassium phosphate, sulfate, citrate and others but not potassium chloride (the form used in salt substitutes and some dietary supplements; see supplements section below) [16].

Selected food sources of potassium are listed in Table 2.
Table 2: Potassium Content of Selected Foods [13] Food 	Milligrams
(mg) per
serving 	Percent
DV*
Apricots, dried, ½ cup 	755 	16
Lentils, cooked, 1 cup 	731 	16
Squash, acorn, mashed, 1 cup 	644 	14
Prunes, dried, ½ cup 	635 	14
Raisins, ½ cup 	618 	13
Potato, baked, flesh only, 1 medium 	610 	13
Kidney beans, canned, 1 cup 	607 	13
Orange juice, 1 cup 	496 	11
Soybeans, mature seeds, boiled, ½ cup 	443 	9
Banana, 1 medium 	422 	9
Milk, 1%, 1 cup 	366 	8
Spinach, raw, 2 cups 	334 	7
Chicken breast, boneless, grilled, 3 ounces 	332 	7
Yogurt, fruit variety, nonfat, 6 ounces 	330 	7
Salmon, Atlantic, farmed, cooked, 3 ounces 	326 	7
Beef, top sirloin, grilled, 3 ounces 	315 	7
Molasses, 1 tablespoon 	308 	7
Tomato, raw, 1 medium 	292 	6
Soymilk, 1 cup 	287 	6
Yogurt, Greek, plain, nonfat, 6 ounces 	240 	5
Broccoli, cooked, chopped, ½ cup 	229 	5
Cantaloupe, cubed, ½ cup 	214 	5
Turkey breast, roasted, 3 ounces 	212 	5
Asparagus, cooked, ½ cup 	202 	4
Apple, with skin, 1 medium 	195 	4
Cashew nuts, 1 ounce 	187 	4
Rice, brown, medium grain, cooked, 1 cup 	154 	3
Tuna, light, canned in water, drained, 3 ounces 	153 	3
Coffee, brewed, 1 cup 	116 	2
Lettuce, iceberg, shredded, 1 cup 	102 	2
Peanut butter, 1 tablespoon 	90 	2
Tea, black, brewed, 1 cup 	88 	2
Flaxseed, whole, 1 tablespoon 	84 	2
Bread, whole wheat, 1 slice 	81 	2
Egg, 1 large 	69 	1
Rice, white, medium grain, cooked, 1 cup 	54 	1
Bread, white, 1 slice 	37 	1
Cheese, mozzarella, part skim, 1½ ounces 	36 	1
Oil (olive, corn, canola, or soybean), 1 tablespoon 	0 	0

*DV = Daily Value. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) developed DVs to help consumers compare the nutrient contents of foods and dietary supplements within the context of a total diet. The DV for potassium is 4,700 mg for adults and children age 4 years and older [17]. FDA requires the new food labels to list potassium content. Foods providing 20% or more of the DV are considered to be high sources of a nutrient, but foods providing lower percentages of the DV also contribute to a healthful diet.

The U.S. Department of Agriculture's (USDA's) FoodData Central [13] lists the nutrient content of many foods and provides a comprehensive list of foods containing potassium. The 2020–2025 Dietary Guidelines for Americans also provides a list of foods containing potassium.
Dietary supplements

In dietary supplements, potassium is often present as potassium chloride, but many other forms—including potassium citrate, phosphate, aspartate, bicarbonate, and gluconate—are also used [18]. The Supplement Facts panel on a dietary supplement label declares the amount of elemental potassium in the product, not the weight of the entire potassium-containing compound. Some dietary supplements contain potassium iodide in microgram amounts, but this ingredient serves as a form of the mineral iodine, not potassium.

Not all multivitamin/mineral supplements contain potassium, but those that do typically provide about 80 mg potassium [18]. Potassium-only supplements are also available, and most contain up to 99 mg potassium. Information on many dietary supplements that contain potassium is available in the Dietary Supplement Label Database from the National Institutes of Health, which contains label information from tens of thousands of dietary supplement products on the market.

Many dietary supplement manufacturers and distributors limit the amount of potassium in their products to 99 mg (which is only about 2% of the DV) because of two concerns related to potassium-containing drugs. First, FDA has ruled that some oral drug products that contain potassium chloride and provide more than 99 mg potassium are not safe because they have been associated with small-bowel lesions [19]. Second, FDA requires some potassium salts containing more than 99 mg potassium per tablet to be labeled with a warning about the reports of small-bowel lesions [20,21]. In accordance with a ruling by Congress, FDA may not limit the amount of any nutrient, including potassium, in a dietary supplement, except for safety-related reasons [22]. However, FDA has not issued a ruling about whether dietary supplements containing more than 99 mg potassium must carry a warning label [21,23].

Only a few studies have examined how well the various forms of potassium in dietary supplements are absorbed. A 2016 dose-response trial found that humans absorb about 94% of potassium gluconate in supplements, and this absorption rate is similar to that of potassium from potatoes [24]. According to an older study, liquid forms of potassium chloride (used as drugs to treat conditions such as digitalis intoxication or arrhythmias due to hypokalemia) are absorbed within a few hours [6]. Enteric coated tablet forms of potassium chloride (designed to prevent dissolution in the stomach but allow it in the small intestine) are not absorbed as rapidly as liquid forms [25].
Salt substitutes

Many salt substitutes contain potassium chloride as a replacement for some or all of the sodium chloride in salt. The potassium content of these products varies widely, from about 440 mg to 2,800 mg potassium per teaspoon [1]. Some people, such as those with kidney disease or who are taking certain medications, should consult their health care provider before taking salt substitutes because of the risk of hyperkalemia posed by the high levels of potassium in these products.
Potassium Intakes and Status

Dietary surveys consistently show that people in the United States consume less potassium than recommended, which is why the 2015–2020 Dietary Guidelines for Americans identifies potassium as a nutrient of public health concern [26]. According to data from the 2013–2014 National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES), the average daily potassium intake from foods is 2,423 mg for males age 2–19, and 1,888 mg for females age 2–19 [27]. In adults age 20 and over, the average daily potassium intake from foods is 3,016 mg for men and 2,320 mg for women.

Average potassium intakes vary by race. Non-Hispanic blacks age 20 and older consume an average of 2,449 mg potassium per day. Average daily intakes are 2,695 mg for Hispanic whites and 2,697 mg for non-Hispanic whites [27].

Use of potassium-containing dietary supplements does not significantly increase total potassium intakes among U.S. adults [28], probably because most potassium-containing dietary supplements provide no more than 99 mg potassium per serving [21]. Data from NHANES 2013–2014 indicate that 12% of children and adults age 2 and over use supplements containing potassium, and among those who do, supplement use adds a mean of only 87 mg to total daily potassium intakes [27].
Potassium Deficiency

Insufficient potassium intakes can increase blood pressure, kidney stone risk, bone turnover, urinary calcium excretion, and salt sensitivity (meaning that changes in sodium intakes affect blood pressure to a greater than normal extent) [1].

Severe potassium deficiency can cause hypokalemia, (serum potassium level less than about 3.6 mmol/L) [3,7,8]. Hypokalemia affects up to 21% of hospitalized patients, usually because of the use of diuretics and other medications [29,30], but it is rare among healthy people with normal kidney function.

Mild hypokalemia is characterized by constipation, fatigue, muscle weakness, and malaise [3]. Moderate to severe hypokalemia (serum potassium level less than about 2.5 mmol/L) can cause polyuria (large volume of dilute urine); encephalopathy in patients with kidney disease; glucose intolerance; muscular paralysis; poor respiration; and cardiac arrhythmias, especially in individuals with underlying heart disease [1,3,7]. Severe hypokalemia can be life threatening because of its effects on muscle contraction and, hence, cardiac function [5].

Hypokalemia is rarely caused by low dietary potassium intake alone, but it can result from diarrhea due to potassium losses in the stool. It can also result from vomiting, which produces metabolic alkalosis, leading to potassium losses in the kidneys. Hypokalemia can also be caused by refeeding syndrome (the metabolic response to initial refeeding after a starvation period) because of potassium’s movement into cells, laxative abuse, diuretic use, eating clay (a type of pica), heavy sweating, or dialysis [3,5,7,31,32].

Magnesium depletion can contribute to hypokalemia by increasing urinary potassium losses [1,33,34]. It can also increase the risk of cardiac arrhythmias by decreasing intracellular potassium concentrations. More than 50% of individuals with clinically significant hypokalemia might have magnesium deficiency [34]. In people with hypomagnesemia and hypokalemia, both should be treated concurrently [7].
Groups at Risk of Potassium Inadequacy

Potassium inadequacy can occur with intakes that are below the AI but above the amount required to prevent hypokalemia. The following groups are more likely than others to have poor potassium status.
People with inflammatory bowel diseases

Potassium is secreted within the colon, and this process is normally balanced by absorption [35]. However, in inflammatory bowel disease (including Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis), potassium secretion increases, which can lead to poor potassium status. Inflammatory bowel diseases are also characterized by chronic diarrhea, which can further increase potassium excretion [36].
People who use certain medications, including diuretics and laxatives

Certain diuretics (e.g., thiazide diuretics) that are commonly used to treat high blood pressure increase urinary potassium excretion and can cause hypokalemia [7,8]. Potassium-sparing diuretics, however, do not increase potassium excretion and can actually cause hyperkalemia. Large doses of laxatives and repeated use of enemas can also cause hypokalemia because they increase losses of potassium in stool.
People with pica

Pica is the persistent eating of non-nutritive substances, such as clay. When consumed, clay binds potassium in the gastrointestinal tract, which can increase potassium excretion and lead to hypokalemia [5,31,32]. Cessation of pica combined with potassium supplementation can restore potassium status and resolve symptoms of potassium deficiency.
Potassium and Health

Because of potassium’s wide-ranging roles in the body, low intakes can increase the risk of illness. This section focuses on four diseases and disorders in which potassium might be involved: hypertension and stroke, kidney stones, bone health, and blood glucose control and type 2 diabetes.
Hypertension and stroke

Hypertension, a major risk factor for coronary heart disease and stroke, affects almost a third of Americans [2,37]. According to an extensive body of literature, low potassium intakes increase the risk of hypertension, especially when combined with high sodium intakes [16,38-40]. Higher potassium intakes, in contrast, may help decrease blood pressure, in part by increasing vasodilation and urinary sodium excretion, which in turn reduces plasma volume [1]; this effect may be most pronounced in salt-sensitive individuals [2,3,5,37,41].

The Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) eating pattern, which emphasizes potassium from fruits, vegetables, and low-fat dairy products, lowers systolic blood pressure by an average of 5.5 mmHg and diastolic blood pressure by 3.0 mmHg [42]. The DASH eating pattern provides three times more potassium than the average American diet. However, it also increases intakes of other nutrients, such as magnesium and calcium, that are also associated with reductions in blood pressure, so potassium’s independent contribution cannot be determined. Additional information and sample DASH menu plans are available on the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute website.

Results from most clinical trials suggest that potassium supplementation reduces blood pressure. A 2017 meta-analysis of 25 randomized controlled trials in 1,163 participants with hypertension found significant reductions in systolic blood pressure (by 4.48 mm Hg) and diastolic blood pressure (by 2.96 mmHg) with potassium supplementation, mostly as potassium chloride at 30–120 mmol/day potassium (1,173–4,692 mg), for 4–15 weeks [43]. Another meta-analysis of 15 randomized controlled trials found that potassium supplements (mostly containing potassium chloride at 60–65 mEq/day potassium [2,346–2,541 mg]) for 4–24 weeks in 917 patients with normal blood pressure or hypertension who were not taking antihypertensive medications significantly reduced both systolic and diastolic blood pressure [44]. The supplements had the greatest effect in patients with hypertension, reducing systolic blood pressure by a mean of 6.8 mmHg and diastolic blood pressure by 4.6 mmHg. Two earlier meta-analyses of 19 trials [45] and 33 trials [46] had similar findings. However, a Cochrane Review of six of the highest-quality trials found nonsignificant reductions in systolic and diastolic blood pressure with potassium supplementation [47].

In 2018, the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) published a systematic review of the effects of sodium and potassium intakes on chronic disease outcomes and their risk factors [48]. The authors concluded that, based on observational studies, the associations between dietary potassium intakes and lower blood pressure in adults were inconsistent. They also found no evidence for an association between potassium intakes and the risk of hypertension. The authors did report, however, that potassium supplements (mostly containing potassium chloride) in doses ranging from 20 to 120 mmol/day (782 to 4,692 mg/day) for 1 to 36 months lowered both systolic and diastolic blood pressure compared to placebo. A similar analysis conducted by the NASEM committee that included 16 trials found that potassium supplements significantly lowered systolic blood pressure by a mean of 6.87 mmHg and diastolic blood pressure by 3.57 mmHg [11]. However, the effects were stronger among studies including participants with hypertension; for studies including only participants without hypertension, the effects were not statistically significant. Based on 13 randomized controlled trials that primarily enrolled patients with hypertension, the AHRQ review found that the use of potassium-containing salt substitutes in place of sodium chloride significantly reduced systolic blood pressure in adults by a mean of 5.58 mmHg and diastolic blood pressure by 2.88 mmHg [48]. However, reducing sodium intake decreased both systolic and diastolic blood pressure in adults, and increasing potassium intake via food or supplements did not reduce blood pressure any further. This finding suggests that at least some of the beneficial effects of potassium salt substitutes on blood pressure may be due to the accompanying reduction in sodium intake, rather than the increase in potassium intake.

Higher potassium intakes have been associated with a decreased risk of stroke and possibly other cardiovascular diseases (CVDs) [16,49]. A meta-analysis of 11 prospective cohort studies in 247,510 adults found that a 1,640 mg per day higher potassium intake was associated with a significant 21% lower risk of stroke as well as nonsignificant lower risks of coronary heart disease and total CVD [39]. Similarly, the authors of a meta-analysis of nine cohort studies reported a significant 24% lower risk of stroke with higher potassium intakes and a nonsignificant reduction in coronary heart disease and CVD risk [50]. However, the AHRQ review found inconsistent relationships between potassium intakes and risk of stroke based on 15 observational studies [48].

Any beneficial effect of potassium on CVD is likely due to its antihypertensive effects. However, some research shows a benefit even when blood pressure is accounted for. For example, a 2016 meta-analysis of 16 cohort studies with a total of 639,440 participants found that those with the highest potassium intakes (median 103 mmol [4,027 mg] per day) had a 15% lower risk of stroke than those with the lowest potassium intakes (median 52.5 mmol [2,053 mg] per day). In addition, participants who consumed 90 mmol potassium/day (approximately 3,500 mg) had the lowest risk of stroke [51]. However, even when blood pressure was accounted for, higher potassium intakes still produced a significant 13% lower risk of stroke. These findings suggest that other mechanisms (e.g., improved endothelial function and reduced free radical formation) may be involved [37].

FDA has approved the following health claim: "Diets containing foods that are a good source of potassium and that are low in sodium may reduce the risk of high blood pressure and stroke" [17]. Overall, the evidence suggests that consuming more potassium might have a favorable effect on blood pressure and stroke, and it might also help prevent other forms of CVD. However, more research on both dietary and supplemental potassium is needed before firm conclusions can be drawn.
Kidney stones

Kidney stones are most common in people age 40 to 60 [52]. Stones containing calcium—in the form of calcium oxalate or calcium phosphate—are the most common type of kidney stone. Low potassium intakes impair calcium reabsorption within the kidney, increasing urinary calcium excretion and potentially causing hypercalciuria and kidney stones [16,37]. Low urinary levels of citrate also contribute to kidney stone development.

Observational studies show inverse associations between dietary potassium intakes and risk of kidney stones. In a cohort of 45,619 men age 40 to 75 years with no history of kidney stones, those with the highest potassium intakes (≥4,042 mg/day on average) had a 51% lower risk of kidney stones over 4 years of follow-up than those with the lowest intakes (≤2,895 mg/day) [53]. Similarly, in more than 90,000 women age 34–59 who participated in the Nurses' Health Study and had no history of kidney stones, those who consumed an average of more than 4,099 mg of potassium per day had a 35% lower risk of kidney stones over a 12-year follow-up period than those who averaged less than 2,407 mg of potassium per day [54].

Some research suggests that supplementation with potassium citrate reduces hypercalciuria as well as the risk of kidney stone formation and growth [52,55]. In a clinical trial of 57 patients with at least two kidney stones (either calcium oxalate or calcium oxalate plus calcium phosphate) over the previous 2 years and hypocitraturia (low urinary citrate levels), supplementation with 30–60 mEq potassium citrate (providing 1,173 to 2,346 mg potassium) for 3 years significantly reduced kidney stone formation compared with placebo [55]. This study was included in a 2015 Cochrane Review of seven studies that examined the effects of potassium citrate, potassium-sodium citrate, and potassium-magnesium citrate supplementation on the prevention and treatment of calcium-containing kidney stones in a total of 477 participants, most of whom had calcium oxalate stones [52]. The potassium citrate salts significantly reduced the risk of new stones and reduced stone size. However, the proposed mechanism involves citrate, not potassium per se; citrate forms complexes with urinary calcium and increases urine pH, inhibiting the formation of calcium oxalate crystals [52,56]. The authors of the AHRQ review [48] concluded that observational studies suggest an association between higher potassium intakes and lower risk of kidney stones. However, they also found the evidence insufficient to determine whether potassium supplements are effective because only one trial that addressed this question [55] met their inclusion criteria.

Additional research is needed to fully understand the potential link between dietary and supplemental potassium and the risk of kidney stones.
Bone health

Observational studies suggest that increased consumption of potassium from fruits and vegetables is associated with increased bone mineral density [57]. This evidence, combined with evidence from metabolic studies and a few clinical trials, suggests that dietary potassium may improve bone health.

The underlying mechanisms are unclear, but one hypothesis is that potassium helps protect bone through its effect on acid-base balance [37]. Diets that are high in acid-forming foods, such as meats and cereal grains, contribute to metabolic acidosis and might have an adverse effect on bone. Alkaline components in the form of potassium salts (potassium bicarbonate or citrate, but not potassium chloride) from food or potassium supplements might counter this effect and help preserve bone tissue. In the Framingham Heart Study for example, higher potassium intake was associated with significantly greater bone mineral density in 628 elderly men and women [58]. In another study, the DASH eating pattern significantly reduced biochemical markers of bone turnover [59]. This eating pattern has a lower acid load than typical Western diets and is also high in calcium and magnesium, in addition to potassium, so any independent contribution of potassium cannot be determined.

Only a few clinical trials have examined the effects of potassium supplements on markers of bone health. One trial found that supplementation with potassium citrate at either 60 mmol/day (2,346 mg potassium) or 90 mmol/day (3,519 mg potassium) for 6 months significantly reduced urinary calcium excretion compared with placebo in 52 healthy men and women older than 55 years [60]. In another clinical trial, 201 healthy adults age 65 years or older received daily supplementation with 60 mEq potassium citrate (providing 2,346 mg potassium) or placebo as well as 500 mg/day calcium (as calcium carbonate) and 400 International Units (IU)/day vitamin D3 for 2 years [61]. Potassium supplementation significantly increased bone mineral density at the lumbar spine and bone microarchitecture compared with placebo. In a similar clinical trial among older adults, supplemental potassium bicarbonate (mean doses of 2,893 or 4,340 mg/day potassium) for 84 days significantly reduced biochemical markers of bone turnover and urinary calcium excretion [62]. Conversely, a clinical trial in 276 postmenopausal women age 55–65 years found that supplementation with potassium citrate at either 18.5 mEq/day (providing 723 mg potassium) or 55.5 mEq/day (2,170 mg potassium) for 2 years did not significantly reduce bone turnover or increase bone mineral density at the hip or lumbar spine compared with placebo [63].

Overall, higher intakes of potassium from diets that emphasize fruits and vegetables might improve bone health. However, more research is needed to elucidate the underlying mechanisms and tease out potassium’s individual contribution.
Blood glucose control and type 2 diabetes

Type 2 diabetes is a growing public health concern that currently affects almost 12% of U.S. adults [64]. Although individuals with obesity have an elevated risk of type 2 diabetes, other metabolic factors also play a role. Because potassium is needed for insulin secretion from pancreatic cells, hypokalemia impairs insulin secretion and could lead to glucose intolerance [2]. This effect has been observed mainly with long-term use of diuretics (particularly those containing thiazides) or hyperaldosteronism (excessive aldosterone production), which both increase urinary potassium losses, but it can occur in healthy individuals as well [2,10,16,65].

Numerous observational studies of adults have found associations between lower potassium intakes or lower serum or urinary potassium levels and increased rates of fasting glucose, insulin resistance, and type 2 diabetes [66-72]. These associations might be stronger in African Americans, who tend to have lower potassium intakes, than in whites [68,71]. For example, one study of 1,066 adults age 18–30 years without diabetes found that those with urinary potassium levels in the lowest quintile were more than twice as likely to develop type 2 diabetes over 15 years of follow-up than those in the highest quintile [68]. Among 4,754 participants from the same study with potassium intake data, African Americans with lower potassium intakes had a significantly greater risk of type 2 diabetes over 20 years of follow-up than those with higher intakes, but this association was not found in whites.

In another observational study, which analyzed data from 84,360 women age 34–59 years participating in the Nurses’ Health Study, those in the highest quintile of potassium intake had a 38% lower risk of developing type 2 diabetes over 6 years of follow-up than those in the lowest quintile [66]. Serum potassium levels were inversely associated with fasting glucose levels in 5,415 participants age 45–84 years from the Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis, but these levels had no significant association with diabetes risk over 8 years of follow-up [70].

Although observational studies suggest that potassium status is linked to blood glucose control and type 2 diabetes, this association has not been adequately evaluated in clinical trials. In a small clinical trial in 29 African American adults with prediabetes and low to normal serum potassium levels (3.3–4.0 mmol/L), supplementation with 40 mEq (1,564 mg) potassium (as potassium chloride) for 3 months significantly lowered fasting glucose levels, but it did not affect glucose or insulin measures during an oral glucose tolerance test [73].

The findings from studies conducted to date are promising. However, more research, including randomized controlled trials, is needed before potassium’s link with blood glucose control and type 2 diabetes can be confirmed.
Health Risks from Excessive Potassium
Dietary potassium

In healthy people with normal kidney function, high dietary potassium intakes do not pose a health risk because the kidneys eliminate excess amounts in the urine [1]. Although case reports indicate that very large doses of potassium supplements can cause heart abnormalities and death, the NASEM committee concluded that these reports do not provide sufficient evidence to set a UL [11]. In addition, there is no evidence that high intakes of potassium cause hyperkalemia in adults with normal kidney function or other adverse effects. Therefore, the committee did not set a UL for potassium.

However, in people with impaired urinary potassium excretion due to chronic kidney disease or the use of certain medications, such as angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors or potassium-sparing diuretics, even dietary potassium intakes below the AI can cause hyperkalemia [11]. Hyperkalemia can also occur in people with type 1 diabetes, congestive heart failure, adrenal insufficiency, or liver disease [7]. Individuals at risk of hyperkalemia should consult a physician or registered dietitian about appropriate potassium intakes from all sources. Information on low-potassium diets is also available from the National Kidney Disease Education Program.

Although hyperkalemia can be asymptomatic, severe cases can cause muscle weakness, paralysis, heart palpitations, paresthesias (a burning or prickling sensation in the extremities), and cardiac arrhythmias that could be life threatening [1,7].
Potassium from dietary supplements, salt substitutes, and medications

Potassium supplements can cause minor gastrointestinal side effects [48]. Chronic ingestion of doses of potassium supplements (e.g., up to 15,600 mg for 5 days) in healthy people can increase plasma levels of potassium, but not beyond the normal range [1]. However, very high amounts of potassium supplements or salt substitutes that contain potassium could exceed the kidney’s capacity to excrete potassium, causing acute hyperkalemia even in healthy individuals.

The use of potassium salts in certain medications has been associated with small-bowel lesions, causing obstruction, hemorrhage, and perforation [20,74]. For this reason, FDA requires some oral drugs providing more than 99 mg of potassium to be labeled with a warning.
Interactions with Medications

Several types of medications have the potential to affect potassium status in ways that could be dangerous. A few examples are provided below. People taking these and other medications should discuss their potassium intakes and status with their health care providers.
Angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers

ACE inhibitors, such as benazepril (Lotensin), and angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) such as losartan (Cozaar), are used to treat hypertension and heart failure, slow progression of kidney disease in patients with chronic kidney disease and type 2 diabetes, and decrease morbidity and mortality after myocardial infarction [75-77]. These medications reduce urinary potassium excretion, which can lead to hyperkalemia. Experts recommend monitoring potassium status in people taking ACE inhibitors or ARBs, especially if they have other risk factors for hyperkalemia, such as impaired kidney function [75].
Potassium-sparing diuretics

Potassium-sparing diuretics, such as amiloride (Midamor) and spironolactone (Aldactone), reduce the excretion of potassium in the urine and can cause hyperkalemia [77,78]. Experts recommend monitoring potassium status in people taking these medications, especially if they have impaired kidney function or other risk factors for hyperkalemia [78].
Loop and thiazide diuretics

Treatment with loop diuretics, such as furosemide (Lasix) and bumetanide (Bumex), and thiazide diuretics, such as chlorothiazide (Diuril) and metolazone (Zaroxolyn), increases urinary potassium excretion and can lead to hypokalemia [77,78]. Experts recommend monitoring potassium status in people taking these medications and initiating potassium supplementation if warranted [77].
Potassium and Healthful Diets

The federal government's 2020–2025 Dietary Guidelines for Americans notes that "Because foods provide an array of nutrients and other components that have benefits for health, nutritional needs should be met primarily through foods. ... In some cases, fortified foods and dietary supplements are useful when it is not possible otherwise to meet needs for one or more nutrients (e.g., during specific life stages such as pregnancy)."

For more information about building a healthy dietary pattern, refer to the Dietary Guidelines for Americans and the USDA's MyPlate.

The Dietary Guidelines for Americans describes a healthy dietary pattern as one that

    Includes a variety of vegetables; fruits; grains (at least half whole grains); fat-free and low-fat milk, yogurt, and cheese; and oils.
        Many vegetables and fruits are rich sources of potassium. Milk and milk products also contain potassium.
    Includes a variety of protein foods such as lean meats; poultry; eggs; seafood; beans, peas, and lentils; nuts and seeds; and soy products.
        Seafood, lean meats, poultry, legumes, nuts, seeds, and soybeans contain potassium.
    Limits foods and beverages higher in added sugars, saturated fat, and sodium.
    Limits alcoholic beverages.
    Stays within your daily calorie needs.

References

    Institute of Medicine. Dietary Reference Intakes for Water, Potassium, Sodium, Chloride, and Sulfate. Washington, DC; 2005.
    Stone MS, Martyn L, Weaver CM. Potassium intake, bioavailability, hypertension, and glucose control. Nutrients 2016;8. [PubMed abstract]
    Preuss HG, Clouatre DL. Sodium, chloride, and potassium. In: Erdman JW, Macdonald IA, Zeisel SH, eds. Present Knowledge in Nutrition. 10th ed. Washington, DC: Wiley-Blackwell; 2012:475-92.
    Hinderling PH. The pharmacokinetics of potassium in humans is unusual. J Clin Pharmacol 2016;56:1212-20. [PubMed abstract]
    Bailey JL, Sands JM, Franch HA. Water, electrolytes, and acid-based metabolism. In: Ross AC, Caballero B, Cousins RJ, Tucker KL, Ziegler TR, eds. Modern Nutrition in Health and Disease. 11th ed. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2014:102-32.
    Levene DL. Potassium chloride: absorption and excretion. Can Med Assoc J 1973;108:853-5. [PubMed abstract]
    Viera AJ, Wouk N. Potassium disorders: Hypokalemia and hyperkalemia. Am Fam Physician 2015;92:487-95. [PubMed abstract]
    Gennari FJ. Hypokalemia. N Engl J Med 1998;339:451-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Patrick J. Assessment of body potassium stores. Kidney Int 1977;11:476-90. [PubMed abstract]
    Chatterjee R, Yeh HC, Edelman D, Brancati F. Potassium and risk of Type 2 diabetes. Expert Rev Endocrinol Metab 2011;6:665-72. [PubMed abstract]
    National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. Dietary Reference Intakes for Sodium and Potassium. Washington, DC; The National Academies Press; 2019.
    National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. Guiding Principles for Developing Dietary Reference Intakes Based on Chronic Disease. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press; 2017.
    U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service. FoodData Central, 2019.
    O'Neil CE, Keast DR, Fulgoni VL, Nicklas TA. Food sources of energy and nutrients among adults in the US: NHANES 2003-2006. Nutrients 2012;4:2097-120. [PubMed abstract]
    Keast DR, Fulgoni VL, 3rd, Nicklas TA, O'Neil CE. Food sources of energy and nutrients among children in the United States: National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 2003-2006. Nutrients 2013;5:283-301. [PubMed abstract]
    He FJ, MacGregor GA. Beneficial effects of potassium on human health. Physiol Plant 2008;133:725-35. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Food Labeling: Revision of the Nutrition and Supplement Facts Labels. Federal Register 81(103):33894-33895. 2016.
    National Institutes of Health. Dietary Supplement Label Database. 2017.
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. List of Drug Products That Have Been Withdrawn or Removed from the Market for Reasons of Safety or Effectiveness. Federal Register 1998;63.
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Code of Federal Regulations Title 21. 21CFR201.306. Potassium salt preparations intended for oral ingestion by man. 2017.
    Council for Responsible Nutrition. Re: Docket No. FDA-2012-N-1210; Food Labeling: Revision of the Nutrition and Supplement Facts Labels. 2014.
    Commission on Dietary Supplement Labels. Report of the Commission 0n Dietary Supplement Labels. 1997.
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Guidance for Industry: A Food Labeling Guide. 2013.
    Macdonald-Clarke CJ, Martin BR, McCabe LD, McCabe GP, Lachcik PJ, Wastney M, et al. Bioavailability of potassium from potatoes and potassium gluconate: a randomized dose response trial. Am J Clin Nutr 2016;104:346-53. [PubMed abstract]
    Levene DL. The absorption of potassium chloride--liquid vs. tablet. Can Med Assoc J 1973;108:1480 passim. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, U.S. Department of Agriculture. 2015–2020 Dietary Guidelines for Americans. 2015.
    U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service. What We Eat in America, 2013-2014. 2017.
    Bailey RL, Fulgoni VL, 3rd, Keast DR, Dwyer JT. Dietary supplement use is associated with higher intakes of minerals from food sources. Am J Clin Nutr 2011;94:1376-81. [PubMed abstract]
    Paice BJ, Paterson KR, Onyanga-Omara F, Donnelly T, Gray JM, Lawson DH. Record linkage study of hypokalaemia in hospitalized patients. Postgrad Med J 1986;62:187-91. [PubMed abstract]
    Lippi G, Favaloro EJ, Montagnana M, Guidi GC. Prevalence of hypokalaemia: the experience of a large academic hospital. Intern Med J 2010;40:315-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Ukaonu C, Hill DA, Christensen F. Hypokalemic myopathy in pregnancy caused by clay ingestion. Obstet Gynecol 2003;102:1169-71. [PubMed abstract]
    McKenna D. Myopathy, hypokalaemia and pica (geophagia) in pregnancy. Ulster Med J 2006;75:159-60. [PubMed abstract]
    Rude RK. Magnesium. In: Coates PM, Betz JM, Blackman MR, et al., eds. Encyclopedia of Dietary Supplements. 2nd ed. London and New York: Informa Healthcare; 2010:527-37.
    Huang CL, Kuo E. Mechanism of hypokalemia in magnesium deficiency. J Am Soc Nephrol 2007;18:2649-52. [PubMed abstract]
    Barkas F, Liberopoulos E, Kei A, Elisaf M. Electrolyte and acid-base disorders in inflammatory bowel disease. Ann Gastroenterol 2013;26:23-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Musto D, Rispo A, Testa A, Sasso F, Castiglione F. Hypokalemic myopathy in inflammatory bowel diseases. J Crohns Colitis 2013;7:680. [PubMed abstract]
    Weaver CM. Potassium and health. Adv Nutr 2013;4:368S-77S. [PubMed abstract]
    Whelton PK, He J. Health effects of sodium and potassium in humans. Curr Opin Lipidol 2014;25:75-9. [PubMed abstract]
    D'Elia L, Barba G, Cappuccio FP, Strazzullo P. Potassium intake, stroke, and cardiovascular disease a meta-analysis of prospective studies. J Am Coll Cardiol 2011;57:1210-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Zhang Z, Cogswell ME, Gillespie C, Fang J, Loustalot F, Dai S, et al. Association between usual sodium and potassium intake and blood pressure and hypertension among U.S. adults: NHANES 2005-2010. PLoS One 2013;8:e75289. [PubMed abstract]
    Writing Group M, Mozaffarian D, Benjamin EJ, Go AS, Arnett DK, Blaha MJ, et al. Heart Disease and Stroke Statistics-2016 Update: A Report From the American Heart Association. Circulation 2016;133:e38-360. [PubMed abstract]
    Champagne CM. Dietary interventions on blood pressure: the Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) trials. Nutr Rev 2006;64:S53-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Filippini T, Violi F, D'Amico R, Vinceti M. The effect of potassium supplementation on blood pressure in hypertensive subjects: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Int J Cardiol 2017;230:127-35. [PubMed abstract]
    Binia A, Jaeger J, Hu Y, Singh A, Zimmermann D. Daily potassium intake and sodium-to-potassium ratio in the reduction of blood pressure: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. J Hypertens 2015;33:1509-20. [PubMed abstract]
    Cappuccio FP, MacGregor GA. Does potassium supplementation lower blood pressure? A meta-analysis of published trials. J Hypertens 1991;9:465-73. [PubMed abstract]
    Whelton PK, He J, Cutler JA, Brancati FL, Appel LJ, Follmann D, et al. Effects of oral potassium on blood pressure. Meta-analysis of randomized controlled clinical trials. JAMA 1997;277:1624-32. [PubMed abstract]
    Dickinson HO, Nicolson DJ, Campbell F, Beyer FR, Mason J. Potassium supplementation for the management of primary hypertension in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2006:CD004641. [PubMed abstract]
    Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. Sodium and Potassium Intake: Effects on Chronic Disease Outcomes and Risks. Rockville, MD; 2018.
    Aaron KJ, Sanders PW. Role of dietary salt and potassium intake in cardiovascular health and disease: a review of the evidence. Mayo Clin Proc 2013;88:987-95. [PubMed abstract]
    Aburto NJ, Hanson S, Gutierrez H, Hooper L, Elliott P, Cappuccio FP. Effect of increased potassium intake on cardiovascular risk factors and disease: systematic review and meta-analyses. BMJ 2013;346:f1378. [PubMed abstract]
    Vinceti M, Filippini T, Crippa A, de Sesmaisons A, Wise LA, Orsini N. Meta-Analysis of Potassium Intake and the Risk of Stroke. J Am Heart Assoc 2016;5. [PubMed abstract]
    Phillips R, Hanchanale VS, Myatt A, Somani B, Nabi G, Biyani CS. Citrate salts for preventing and treating calcium containing kidney stones in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2015:CD010057. [PubMed abstract]
    Curhan GC, Willett WC, Rimm EB, Stampfer MJ. A prospective study of dietary calcium and other nutrients and the risk of symptomatic kidney stones. N Engl J Med 1993;328:833-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Curhan GC, Willett WC, Speizer FE, Spiegelman D, Stampfer MJ. Comparison of dietary calcium with supplemental calcium and other nutrients as factors affecting the risk for kidney stones in women. Ann Intern Med 1997;126:497-504. [PubMed abstract]
    Barcelo P, Wuhl O, Servitge E, Rousaud A, Pak CY. Randomized double-blind study of potassium citrate in idiopathic hypocitraturic calcium nephrolithiasis. J Urol 1993;150:1761-4. [PubMed abstract]
    Maalouf NM, Moe OW, Adams-Huet B, Sakhaee K. Hypercalciuria associated with high dietary protein intake is not due to acid load. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2011;96:3733-40. [PubMed abstract]
    Hanley DA, Whiting SJ. Does a high dietary acid content cause bone loss, and can bone loss be prevented with an alkaline diet? J Clin Densitom 2013;16:420-5. [PubMed abstract]
    Tucker KL, Hannan MT, Chen H, Cupples LA, Wilson PW, Kiel DP. Potassium, magnesium, and fruit and vegetable intakes are associated with greater bone mineral density in elderly men and women. Am J Clin Nutr 1999;69:727-36. [PubMed abstract]
    Lin PH, Ginty F, Appel LJ, Aickin M, Bohannon A, Garnero P, et al. The DASH diet and sodium reduction improve markers of bone turnover and calcium metabolism in adults. J Nutr 2003;133:3130-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Moseley KF, Weaver CM, Appel L, Sebastian A, Sellmeyer DE. Potassium citrate supplementation results in sustained improvement in calcium balance in older men and women. J Bone Miner Res 2013;28:497-504. [PubMed abstract]
    Jehle S, Hulter HN, Krapf R. Effect of potassium citrate on bone density, microarchitecture, and fracture risk in healthy older adults without osteoporosis: a randomized controlled trial. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2013;98:207-17. [PubMed abstract]
    Dawson-Hughes B, Harris SS, Palermo NJ, Gilhooly CH, Shea MK, Fielding RA, et al. Potassium bicarbonate supplementation lowers bone turnover and calcium excretion in older men and women: A randomized dose-finding trial. J Bone Miner Res 2015;30:2103-11. [PubMed abstract]
    Macdonald HM, Black AJ, Aucott L, Duthie G, Duthie S, Sandison R, et al. Effect of potassium citrate supplementation or increased fruit and vegetable intake on bone metabolism in healthy postmenopausal women: a randomized controlled trial. Am J Clin Nutr 2008;88:465-74. [PubMed abstract]
    Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. National Diabetes Statistics Report, 2017. 2017.
    Zillich AJ, Garg J, Basu S, Bakris GL, Carter BL. Thiazide diuretics, potassium, and the development of diabetes: a quantitative review. Hypertension 2006;48:219-24. [PubMed abstract]
    Colditz GA, Manson JE, Stampfer MJ, Rosner B, Willett WC, Speizer FE. Diet and risk of clinical diabetes in women. Am J Clin Nutr 1992;55:1018-23. [PubMed abstract]
    Chatterjee R, Biggs ML, de Boer IH, Brancati FL, Svetkey LP, Barzilay J, et al. Potassium and glucose measures in older adults: the Cardiovascular Health Study. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 2015;70:255-61. [PubMed abstract]
    Chatterjee R, Colangelo LA, Yeh HC, Anderson CA, Daviglus ML, Liu K, et al. Potassium intake and risk of incident type 2 diabetes mellitus: the Coronary Artery Risk Development in Young Adults (CARDIA) Study. Diabetologia 2012;55:1295-303. [PubMed abstract]
    Chatterjee R, Yeh HC, Shafi T, Selvin E, Anderson C, Pankow JS, et al. Serum and dietary potassium and risk of incident type 2 diabetes mellitus: The Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) study. Arch Intern Med 2010;170:1745-51. [PubMed abstract]
    Chatterjee R, Davenport CA, Svetkey LP, Batch BC, Lin PH, Ramachandran VS, et al. Serum potassium is a predictor of incident diabetes in African Americans with normal aldosterone: the Jackson Heart Study. Am J Clin Nutr 2017;105:442-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Chatterjee R, Yeh HC, Shafi T, Anderson C, Pankow JS, Miller ER, et al. Serum potassium and the racial disparity in diabetes risk: the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) Study. Am J Clin Nutr 2011;93:1087-91. [PubMed abstract]
    Chatterjee R, Zelnick L, Mukamal KJ, Nettleton JA, Kestenbaum BR, Siscovick DS, et al. Potassium measures and their associations with glucose and diabetes risk: The Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis (MESA). PLoS One 2016;11:e0157252. [PubMed abstract]
    Chatterjee R, Slentz C, Davenport CA, Johnson J, Lin PH, Muehlbauer M, et al. Effects of potassium supplements on glucose metabolism in African Americans with prediabetes: a pilot trial. Am J Clin Nutr 2017;106:1431-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Allen AC, Boley SJ, Schultz L, Schwartz S. Potassium-induced lesions of the small bowel. Ii. Pathology and pathogenesis. JAMA 1965;193:1001-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Raebel MA. Hyperkalemia associated with use of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers. Cardiovasc Ther 2012;30:e156-66. [PubMed abstract]
    Epstein M. Hyperkalemia as a constraint to therapy with combination renin-angiotensin system blockade: the elephant in the room. J Clin Hypertens (Greenwich) 2009;11:55-60. [PubMed abstract]
    Natural Medicines. Potassium. 2017.
    Sarafidis PA, Georgianos PI, Lasaridis AN. Diuretics in clinical practice. Part II: electrolyte and acid-base disorders complicating diuretic therapy. Expert Opin Drug Saf 2010;9:259-73. [PubMed abstract]

Disclaimer

This fact sheet by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Office of Dietary Supplements (ODS) provides information that should not take the place of medical advice. We encourage you to talk to your health care providers (doctor, registered dietitian, pharmacist, etc.) about your interest in, questions about, or use of dietary supplements and what may be best for your overall health. Any mention in this publication of a specific product or service, or recommendation from an organization or professional society, does not represent an endorsement by ODS of that product, service, or expert advice.

Updated: June 2, 2022


 Probiotics: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals (original version)
Probiotics: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals
Table of Contents

    Introduction
    Sources of Probiotics
    Probiotics and Health
    Safety Considerations
    Probiotic Selection and Use
    References
    Disclaimer

Introduction

The International Scientific Association for Probiotics and Prebiotics defines probiotics as “live microorganisms that, when administered in adequate amounts, confer a health benefit on the host” [1]. These microorganisms, which consist mainly of bacteria but also include yeasts, are present in some fermented foods (e.g., yogurt), are added to certain food products, and are available as dietary supplements. However, not all foods and dietary supplements that are labeled as probiotics have proven health benefits.

Probiotics should not be confused with prebiotics, which are typically complex carbohydrates (such as inulin and other fructo-oligosaccharides) that microorganisms in the gastrointestinal tract use as metabolic fuel [2]. Commercial products containing both prebiotics and probiotic microorganisms are often called synbiotics. Probiotics should also not be confused with postbiotics, which are preparations comprised of dead, intact, or fragmented microorganisms, with or without their metabolites, that confer a health benefit on the host [3].
Identification

Probiotics are identified by their genus, species, and strain designation; some probiotics also receive subspecies names. Probiotic products often contain microbial organisms from the genera Bifidobacterium, Saccharomyces, Streptococcus, Enterococcus, Escherichia, and Bacillus and from the family Lactobacillaceae.

Probiotics are identified by their specific strain, which includes the genus, the species, the subspecies (if applicable), and an alphanumeric strain designation [4]. Microbial organisms from the genera Bifidobacterium, Saccharomyces, Streptococcus, Enterococcus, Escherichia, and Bacillus are commonly used in probiotic products. In addition, products commonly contain microbes from the family Lactobacillaceae, which includes several species that were formerly in the Lactobacillus genus before that genus was restructured in 2020 [5]. When reporting the results from specific studies, this fact sheet maintains the original genus names that were in use at the time the research was conducted. Table 1 shows examples of the nomenclature used for several commercial strains of probiotic organisms.
Table 1: Nomenclature for sample commercial strains of probiotics [4] Genus 	Species 	Subspecies 	Strain Designation 	Strain Nickname
Lacticaseibacillus(formerly Lactobacillus) 	rhamnosus 	None 	GG 	LGG
Bifidobacterium 	animalis 	lactis 	DN-173 010 	Bifidus regularis
Bifidobacterium 	longum 	longum 	35624 	Bifantis
Mechanisms of action

Probiotics exert their health effects through a wide variety of mechanisms. Some of these mechanisms, such as inhibiting the growth of pathogenic microorganisms in the gastrointestinal tract, are widely shared among probiotic strains. Other mechanisms are unique to a particular species or strain.

The human gastrointestinal tract is colonized by many microorganisms, including bacteria, archaea, viruses, fungi, and protozoa. The activity and composition of these microorganisms (collectively known as the gut microbiota, microbiome, or intestinal microflora) can affect human health and disease.

Probiotics are consumed orally and exert their effects in the gastrointestinal tract, where they may influence the intestinal microbiota. Probiotics may transiently colonize the human gut mucosa in highly individualized patterns, depending on the baseline microbiota, probiotic strain, and gastrointestinal tract region [6].

Probiotics also exert health effects by nonspecific, species-specific, and strain-specific mechanisms. The nonspecific mechanisms vary widely among the strains, species, or even genera of commonly used probiotic supplements. These mechanisms include the inhibition of the growth of pathogenic microorganisms in the gastrointestinal tract (by fostering colonization resistance, improving intestinal transit, producing antimicrobial substances, or helping normalize a perturbed microbiota), production of bioactive metabolites (e.g., short-chain fatty acids), and the reduction of luminal pH in the colon [1]. Species-specific mechanisms can include vitamin synthesis, gut barrier reinforcement, bile salt metabolism, enzymatic activity, and toxin neutralization. Other mechanisms, such as cytokine production, specific immunomodulatory activities, and effects on the endocrine and nervous systems, are expressed in a strain-specific manner.

Because the effects of probiotics can be specific to certain probiotic strains, recommendations for their use in the clinic need to be strain-specific [4,7,8]. Additionally, researchers should take probiotic strains into account when designing studies and when pooling data from studies that may have used different probiotic strains to avoid misleading conclusions about their efficacy and safety.
Sources of Probiotics
Food

Some types of fermented foods, such as yogurt, are potential sources of beneficial microbes, though not all fermented foods that contain live cultures have probiotic microorganisms. Probiotic microorganisms are also sometimes added to unfermented foods.

Fermented foods are made through the growth and metabolic activity of a variety of live microbial cultures [9]. Many of these foods are rich sources of live and potentially beneficial microbes. Some fermented foods, such as sourdough bread and most commercial pickles, are processed after they are fermented and do not contain live cultures when consumed. Yogurt, another type of fermented food, is made using Lactobacillus bulgaricus and Streptococcus thermophilus. Yogurt may also contain probiotic microorganisms from Bifidobacterium or Lactobacillaceae.

Fermented foods that contain live cultures but do not typically contain proven probiotic microorganisms include many cheeses, kimchi (a Korean fermented cabbage dish), kombucha (a fermented tea), sauerkraut (fermented cabbage), miso (a fermented soybean-based paste), pickles, and raw unfiltered apple cider vinegar made from fermented apple sugars [10].

Certain unfermented foods, such as milks, juices, smoothies, cereals, nutrition bars, and infant and toddler formulas, might be formulated with added probiotics. Typically, these probiotics are indicated on the label, with a strain designation and the number of viable microorganisms.
Dietary supplements

Dietary supplements that contain probiotics can include from one to many strains. The number of viable cells in a probiotic supplement is indicated by the number of colony-forming units (CFU) listed on the label. However, it can be difficult to determine which products offer verifiable health benefits due to the wide variety of probiotic strains and doses found in probiotic products and inconsistent labeling practices and recommendations for use.

Probiotics are available as dietary supplements (in capsules, powders, liquids, and other forms) that contain a wide variety of strains and doses [11]. Products can include single strains or multiple strains of live microorganisms. The effects of many commercial products that contain probiotics have not been examined in research studies, and it is difficult for people who are not familiar with probiotic research to determine which products are backed by evidence [12]. However, some organizations have systematically reviewed the available evidence and developed recommendations for using specific probiotics—including the appropriate product, dose, and formulation—to prevent or treat various health conditions [4,13].

Probiotics are measured in CFU, which indicate the number of viable cells. Amounts may be written on product labels as, for example, 1 x 109 for 1 billion CFU or 1 x 1010 for 10 billion CFU. Many probiotic supplements contain 1 to 10 billion CFU per dose, but some products contain 50 billion CFU or more. However, products with higher CFU counts are not necessarily more effective than products with a lower CFU count.

Current labeling regulations only require manufacturers to list the total weight of the microorganisms on probiotic products’ Supplement Facts labels; this cellular mass can consist of both live and dead microorganisms and, therefore, has no relationship with the number of viable microorganisms in the product [14]. Manufacturers may voluntarily list the CFU in a product in addition to the total microorganism weight on the Supplement Facts label. Because probiotics must be consumed alive to have health benefits and they can die during their shelf life, users should look for products labeled with the number of CFU at the end of the product’s shelf life, not at the time of manufacture.
Probiotics and Health

The potential health benefits of probiotics are the focus of a great deal of scientific research. This section focuses on eight health conditions: atopic dermatitis, pediatric acute infectious diarrhea, antibiotic-associated diarrhea (AAD), necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC), inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), hypercholesterolemia, and obesity.

For information on probiotics and the common cold, influenza, and other respiratory tract infections, please see the Office of Dietary Supplements (ODS) health professional fact sheet, Dietary Supplements for Immune Function and Infectious Diseases.
Atopic dermatitis

Studies have evaluated the use of various probiotic products to prevent atopic dermatitis, a common inflammatory skin disorder. The results of these studies suggest that probiotics may reduce the risk of developing atopic dermatitis and the severity of symptoms, though the relief these products can provide may be limited.

Atopic dermatitis, the most common form of eczema, is also one of the most common chronic inflammatory skin disorders, affecting approximately 15% to 20% of children and 1% to 3% of adults worldwide [15].

Numerous probiotic studies have evaluated the effects of various species and strains of bacteria on the prevention of atopic dermatitis, and several meta-analyses have synthesized the findings of these studies. These studies and meta-analyses show that exposure to probiotics during pregnancy and in early infancy might reduce the risk of developing atopic dermatitis in children.

For example, a 2018 meta-analysis included 27 randomized controlled trials (RCTs) and one controlled cohort study in a total of 6,907 infants and children who were exposed to probiotics in utero for 2 weeks to 7 months (via maternal oral supplementation) and/or by oral administration to the infants after birth for 2 to 13 months [16]. The results showed that between age 6 months and 9 years, probiotic treatment with single strains or mixtures that included Lactobacillus, Bifidobacterium, and Propionibacterium strains significantly reduced the risk of atopic dermatitis from 34.7% in the control group to 28.5% in the probiotic group. Subgroup analyses showed that the use of probiotics during both the prenatal and postnatal periods significantly reduced the incidence of dermatitis; however, taking probiotics during only the prenatal or postnatal period did not. In addition, the effects of probiotic treatment varied by strain. For example, supplementation with either Lactobacillus rhamnosus or Lactobacillus paracasei significantly reduced the incidence of atopic dermatitis, whereas supplementation with Lactobacillus reuteri or Lactobacillus acidophilus did not.

In contrast, another meta-analysis of five RCTs with a total of 889 participants found that Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG (LGG) supplementation did not reduce the risk of eczema in children up to age 4 years, regardless of whether the children received probiotics directly or were exposed to probiotics in utero and/or during breastfeeding via maternal supplementation [17].

Most published meta-analyses have shown that probiotics slightly reduce the severity of atopic dermatitis symptoms in infants and children. For example, a meta-analysis of 13 RCTs with a total of 1,070 participants age 18 years or younger found that probiotic treatment for 4 to 8 weeks significantly reduced SCORing Atopic Dermatitis (SCORAD) values, indicating reduced symptom severity [18]. Subgroup analyses found that probiotics had protective effects in children age 1 to 18 years (nine trials) but not in infants younger than 1 year (five trials). In addition, treatment with Lactobacillus, Lactobacillus fermentum, or a mixture of probiotic strains significantly reduced SCORAD values in the children, whereas LGG and Lactobacillus plantarum had no effect.

Another meta-analysis included eight RCTs with a total of 741 participants from birth to 36 months of age who were treated with Lactobacillus or Bifidobacterium for 4 to 24 weeks [19]. Probiotics that contained Lactobacillus reduced the severity of atopic dermatitis symptoms in infants and toddlers, but those containing Bifidobacterium did not. In addition, the treatment significantly improved symptoms in participants with moderate-to-severe forms of the disease but not in those with mild forms. A Cochrane Review of 39 RCTs of single probiotics and probiotic mixtures that were used to treat eczema in 2,599 participants age 1 to 55 years (most were children) found that probiotic treatment might slightly reduce SCORAD scores [20]. However, the researchers concluded that the differences were not clinically significant and that the current evidence does not support the use of probiotics for eczema treatment.

Overall, the available evidence suggests that the use of probiotics might reduce the risk of developing atopic dermatitis and lead to significant reductions in atopic dermatitis SCORAD scores, but these products might provide only limited relief from the condition. Furthermore, the effects of probiotics vary by the strain used, the timing of administration, and the patient’s age, so it is difficult to make recommendations.
Pediatric acute infectious diarrhea

Some evidence supports using certain probiotics to manage acute infectious diarrhea in pediatric patients; a few reviews have shown that some probiotics reduce the duration of acute diarrhea. However, not all trials concur with these results, and it is unclear whether probiotic supplements are an effective method for managing this condition in developed countries.

Acute diarrhea is usually defined as loose or liquid stools and/or an increase in the frequency of bowel movements (typically at least three in 24 hours) [21]. Acute diarrhea can be accompanied by fever or vomiting, and it usually lasts no more than 7 days.

A 2020 Cochrane Review that included 82 RCTs with a total of 12,127 participants (primarily children) reported a reduction of 36% in the risk of diarrhea that lasted 48 hours or more in people who received probiotics compared with those who did not [22]. Probiotics also reduced the mean duration of diarrhea by 21.3 hours. However, the authors noted that there was significant heterogeneity between the included studies, and when they included only studies that had a low risk of bias in their analysis, they found no difference between groups for the risk of diarrhea that lasted 48 hours or more or for the duration of diarrhea.

An assessment of 11 RCTs with a total of 2,444 participants showed that LGG is most effective in treating infectious diarrhea at a daily dose of at least 1010 CFU [23,24]. A review of 22 RCTs and non-randomized trials with a total of 2,440 participants age 1 month to 15 years found that administering Saccharomyces boulardii (most commonly 109 to 1010 CFU/day for 5–10 days) reduced both the duration of diarrhea and stool frequency [25]. In both of these analyses, LGG and Saccharomyces boulardii reduced the duration of acute infectious diarrhea by approximately 1 day. However, two subsequent clinical trials found that a 5-day course of LGG (1 x 1010 CFU twice per day taken alone in one trial and a total of 4 x 109 CFU twice per day of LGG and Lactobacillus helveticus R0052 in the other) was no better than placebo at treating or improving the outcomes of acute gastroenteritis in 1,729 infants and young children who presented to pediatric emergency departments [26,27].

Recent studies suggest that probiotics might not be efficacious in emergency departments in developed countries because most episodes of acute infectious diarrhea are self-limiting and require no treatment other than rehydration therapy [26,27]. Therefore, the cost-effectiveness of using probiotic supplements to manage acute viral diarrhea lacks consensus [28,29].

In 2023, the European Society for Paediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition (ESPGHAN) Working Group on Probiotics and Prebiotics issued updated versions of their recommendations for using probiotics to manage specific gastrointestinal disorders in children, including acute gastroenteritis [30]. The Working Group reported that there is evidence that LGG, Saccharomyces boulardii, Limosilactobacillus reuteri, and the combination of Lacticaseibacillus rhamnosus and Limosilactobacillus reuteri can reduce the duration of diarrhea; therefore, they recommend the use of specific doses and durations of these probiotics in pediatric patients with acute gastroenteritis. However, the grade of recommendation for each of these probiotics was weak, and the certainty of evidence for each was low or very low. In contrast, the American Gastroenterological Association (AGA) recommended against the use of probiotics in children with acute infectious gastroenteritis in the United States and Canada in their 2020 technical review [31]. In this review, most of the studies that showed a benefit were performed in India, Italy, Poland, Turkey, and Pakistan, and the review authors cited concerns about the risk of bias in these studies. The few studies that were conducted in the United States and Canada reported no benefits.
Antibiotic-associated diarrhea

Antibiotics can disrupt the intestinal microbiome, and people who are taking antibiotics are at risk of antibiotic-associated diarrhea (AAD). Some systematic reviews and meta-analyses report that starting certain probiotic treatments within 2 days of the first antibiotic dose helps reduce the risk of antibiotic-associated diarrhea in specific patient populations.

Antibiotics are another common cause of acute-onset diarrhea. By decreasing microbial diversity, antibiotic treatment often disturbs the intestinal microbiome and can lead to a loss of microbial metabolism (resulting in osmotic diarrhea due to excessive fluid in the intestine), loss of colonization resistance (resulting in increased numbers of infections by other pathogens), and increased intestinal motility [32]. Up to 30% of patients who use antibiotics experience AAD [33].

Individuals who are receiving inpatient care are at significantly greater risk of developing AAD than those who are receiving outpatient care. Similarly, children younger than 2 years and seniors older than 65 years are at greater risk of developing AAD than other children and adults. Some antibiotics (e.g., erythromycin, penicillin) are associated with AAD more often than others [32,33].

Meta-analyses indicate that the use of any of a few species and strains of probiotics might reduce the risk of AAD by 51% [34]. However, the benefits of using probiotics to prevent AAD depend on the type of antibiotic that caused the AAD, the strain(s) of probiotic used, the life stage of the user (i.e., child, younger adult, older adult), and whether the user is receiving inpatient or outpatient care. The use of probiotics has been associated with a reduced risk of AAD in children and adults age 18 to 64 years but not in adults age 65 years and older [35].

Both LGG and Saccharomyces boulardii have been shown to reduce the risk of AAD. In a systematic review and meta-analysis of 12 RCTs that included a total of 1,499 children and adults, treatment with 4 x 108 to 12 x 1010 CFU LGG for 10 days to 3 months reduced the risk of AAD in patients who were treated with antibiotics from 22.4% to 12.3% [36]. However, when the 445 children and 1,052 adults were evaluated separately, the difference was only statistically significant in children. Although the optimal dose of LGG is unclear, 1 to 2 x 1010 CFU/day reduced the risk of AAD in children by 71% [36]. Taking probiotics within 2 days of the first antibiotic dose is more effective than starting to take them later.

In a systematic review and meta-analysis of 21 RCTs that enrolled a total of 4,780 adults and children (who were mostly between 6 months and 65 years of age), treatment with Saccharomyces boulardii reduced the risk of AAD in adults who were treated with antibiotics from 17.4% to 8.2% when compared with placebo or no treatment [37]. Among the children, Saccharomyces boulardii reduced the risk from 20.9% to 8.8%. Various doses of Saccharomyces boulardii were tested, and no clear dose-dependent effects were observed.

A 2023 position paper from the ESPGHAN Working Group on Probiotics and Prebiotics recommends administering doses of 5 x 109 CFU/day or more of LGG or Saccharomyces boulardii starting simultaneously with antibiotics to prevent AAD in nonhospitalized and hospitalized children who have risk factors for AAD, such as the presence of comorbidities [30].

Overall, the available evidence suggests that starting probiotic treatment with LGG or Saccharomyces boulardii within 2 days of the first antibiotic dose helps reduce the risk of AAD in children and adults age 18 to 64. There is no evidence to suggest that the benefits are greater when more than one probiotic strain is used.
Necrotizing enterocolitis

Researchers have evaluated whether specific combinations of probiotics can reduce the severe inflammatory responses seen in preterm infants with necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC). Probiotic products are sometimes used in hospital settings to reduce the risk of necrotizing enterocolitis, but the U.S. Food and Drug Administration has raised concerns that administering probiotics to preterm infants may cause adverse effects.

NEC is a life-threatening gastrointestinal illness that mostly affects preterm infants within the first few weeks of birth. NEC occurs when an imbalance in the communities of bacteria in the intestine provokes an inflammatory response from the body; the resulting inflammation can destroy the cells that line the intestine. The risk of NEC is especially high in preterm infants with very low birth weight (i.e., those weighing <1,500 g [3.3 pounds]) [38]. Infants who recover from NEC may have long-lasting health problems, including short bowel syndrome, parenteral nutrition-associated liver injury, and developmental delays.

Certain probiotics can block the signaling pathways in the cells of the intestine that respond to bacterial invaders [38,39]. This can potentially protect the intestine by reducing the inflammatory response. Other probiotics may strengthen the gut barrier, reducing the risk of bacterial translocation and sepsis [40-43]. Thus, researchers have investigated the use of probiotics to prevent NEC in preterm infants, and probiotic products are sometimes used in hospital settings to reduce the risk of NEC [44-46].

In a 2020 AGA technical review, the authors analyzed the results of 63 trials that evaluated the use of single-strain and multi-strain probiotics in a total of 15,712 preterm infants (<37 weeks gestational age) [47]. The review found that administering specific combinations of Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium strains reduced the risk of all-cause mortality, the risk of severe NEC, and the number of days to reach full enteral feeds in these infants when compared with placebo. The results of this review informed AGA’s clinical practice guidelines for probiotics, in which AGA recommends using specific combinations of Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium strains in preterm, low-birth-weight infants to prevent NEC [31]. In addition, the World Health Organization published guidelines in 2023 for the care of preterm or low birth weight infants [48]. Their guidelines state that probiotics may be considered for human-milk-fed preterm infants who are born before 32 weeks gestation. Also in 2023, a systematic review of 90 trials in preterm infants found that multi-strain probiotics reduce the risk of all-cause mortality, severe NEC, and feeding intolerance; multi-strain probiotics also reduce the time needed to reach full enteral feeds and the duration of hospitalization [49]. However, a Cochrane Review stated that the available evidence for using probiotics in very preterm infants born before 32 weeks gestation and very low birth weight infants who weigh less than 1,500 g at birth is inconclusive and called for more research in this population [46].

In their 2023 position paper, the ESPGHAN Working Group on Probiotics and Prebiotics revisited their 2020 recommendations [50] for using probiotics to prevent NEC in preterm infants and concluded that no changes to the 2020 recommendations were needed [30]. They continue to recommend using either LGG (1 to 6 × 109 CFU) or the combination of Bifidobacterium infantis, Bifidobacterium lactis, and Streptococcus thermophilus (3.0 to 3.5 × 108 CFU for each strain) to reduce the risk of NEC in preterm infants. However, they stated that the grade of this recommendation is weak and the certainty of evidence is low. In addition, they noted that all safety and quality issues must be addressed, such as the potential for probiotic sepsis in preterm infants and the fact that probiotic products might not be labeled with the correct strains [30,50].

The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) issued a news release in 2023 informing the public, including health care providers, that administering probiotics to preterm infants may cause infection or invasive and potentially fatal disease [51]. FDA reported that probiotics have been associated with one infant death and more than two dozen other adverse events in recent years, and the agency reiterated the fact that probiotics have not undergone FDA’s premarket process to evaluate their safety, effectiveness, and quality for medical uses. The agency called for more rigorous clinical trials to provide better evidence for using probiotics in infants.
Inflammatory bowel disease

Alterations to the gut microbiome may play a role in inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), and researchers are evaluating whether probiotics can help manage this chronic condition. The results have been mixed; studies have reported that certain probiotics might provide some benefits to people with ulcerative colitis but not to those with Crohn’s disease. Clinical practice guidelines do not specifically recommend the use of probiotics in people with IBD.

IBD is a chronic inflammatory disease that includes ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease [52]. The exact cause of IBD is unknown, but it is probably a combination of inherited and environmental factors, including genetic alterations and immune system dysfunction [47]. Various treatments for IBD, including oral steroids and other medications, are available, but no cure exists.

Researchers are exploring whether individuals with IBD have alterations in the gut microbiome and whether probiotics might help manage IBD [31]. Several reviews have assessed the effects of probiotics on IBD [31,47,53-56]. The authors of all of these reviews reached similar conclusions—that certain probiotics might have modestly beneficial effects on ulcerative colitis but not Crohn’s disease.

A 2020 systematic review from AGA examined the role of probiotics in managing gastrointestinal disorders [47]. The review included 12 trials that used probiotics to induce or maintain remission in 689 children and adults with Crohn’s disease as well as 17 trials that examined the use of various probiotic formulations to induce or maintain remission in 1,673 children and adults with ulcerative colitis. The trials used various probiotic strains and combinations—including Saccharomyces boulardii, LGG, Lactobacillus johnsonii NCC 533, Escherichia coli Nissle 1917, and an eight-strain combination product called VSL#3—for several months. The results provided no evidence that probiotics help induce or maintain remission in children or adults with Crohn’s disease. The authors could not draw conclusions about whether probiotics benefit patients with severe ulcerative colitis or are effective alternatives to existing therapies. However, there is some evidence to suggest that these supplements might modestly reduce disease activity in individuals with mild-to-moderate ulcerative colitis when combined with conventional therapies. The results of this review are limited by the differences between the studies, including different patient populations, probiotic formulations, treatment durations, and concomitant therapies.

A 2020 Cochrane Review of 14 studies that enrolled a total of 865 participants with ulcerative colitis also indicated that probiotics may help induce remission and that combining probiotics with 5-ASA (an anti-inflammatory medication commonly used to treat IBD) may be superior to using 5-ASA alone [57]. However, the evidence was limited and of low certainty. A similar 2020 Cochrane Review of 12 studies in 1,473 participants with ulcerative colitis examined whether probiotics can help maintain remission [58]. The authors concluded that the effects of products are uncertain because of the small number of participants in the studies and the unreliable methodologies used.

An AGA clinical decision support tool makes no recommendation on the use of probiotics in adults and children with IBD due to knowledge gaps [59]. Similarly, in a clinical practice guideline on the role of probiotics in managing gastrointestinal disorders, AGA recommends using probiotics in adults and children with ulcerative colitis or Crohn’s disease only in the context of a clinical trial [31]. Consensus guidelines published by the British Society of Gastroenterology in 2019 addressed the management of IBD, including the use of probiotics [56]. The authors concluded that although probiotics may be modestly beneficial for people with ulcerative colitis, they should not be routinely used. For people with Crohn’s disease, the authors found no evidence of any benefit. In 2023, the ESPGHAN Working Group on Probiotics and Prebiotics stated that there was not enough evidence to recommend for or against the use of probiotics in children with ulcerative colitis or Crohn’s disease [30].

Additional research, including well-powered RCTs, is needed to identify which patients with IBD might benefit from probiotics and which probiotic strains are most effective [31,54].
Irritable bowel syndrome

In people with irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), populations of Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium decrease as populations of proinflammatory bacterial species increase. Certain probiotic products have the potential to restore some missing microbial functionality and help manage the symptoms of this condition.

IBS is a common functional disorder of the gastrointestinal tract that is characterized by recurrent abdominal discomfort or pain, bloating, and changes in stool form or frequency. Although the causes of IBS are not completely understood, growing evidence suggests potential roles for intestinal microbiota in its pathophysiology and symptoms; IBS has also been linked to stress [60]. According to this research, proinflammatory bacterial species, including Enterobacteriaceae, are abundant in patients with IBS, who typically also have a corresponding reduction in the amounts of Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium in the gastrointestinal tract [61]. Probiotic products commonly contain Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium and, therefore, have the potential to restore some missing microbial functionality and, consequently, help manage IBS symptoms.

Several meta-analyses have assessed the role of probiotics in patients with IBS [62-66]. Most have found that probiotics have a positive, although modest, beneficial effect. For example, a meta-analysis of 23 RCTs in a total of 2,575 patients found that, overall, probiotics reduced the risk that IBS symptoms would persist or not improve by 21% [62]. Various species and strains of probiotics had beneficial effects on global IBS symptoms, abdominal pain, bloating, and flatulence scores, but the quality of the studies was low. Some combinations of probiotics were superior to individual strains in this analysis, but no specific combination was superior to another. A second meta-analysis of 15 RCTs in a total of 1,793 patients with IBS found that probiotics reduced the severity of overall symptoms and abdominal pain more than placebo after 8 to 10 weeks of therapy; in children, these supplements also improved mucosal barrier function [63].

A more recent systematic review included 35 RCTs of 16 single-strain and 19 multi-strain products in 3,406 adults with IBS [67]. Of the studies that found a statistically significant reduction in global symptoms (14 of 29 trials) or a clinically meaningful reduction in abdominal pain (8 of 34 trials), most used multi-strain probiotic products. Furthermore, only trials of multi-strain products found a clinically meaningful improvement in quality of life [64,65].

Whether different strains of probiotic bacteria have beneficial effects in people with IBS probably depends on the IBS symptom being evaluated [68]. In a meta-analysis of 10 RCTs that enrolled a total of 877 adults who were treated with probiotics or placebo for 4 weeks to 6 months, people who received probiotics that contained Bifidobacterium breve, Bifidobacterium longum, or Lactobacillus acidophilus species had lower pain scores than those who received placebo [69]. In contrast, Streptococcus salivarius ssp. thermophilus, Bifidobacterium animalis, Bifidobacterium infantis, Lactobacillus casei, Lactobacillus plantarum, Lactobacillus bulgaricus, and Saccharomyces boulardii had no significant effect. Flatulence declined with the use of all tested probiotics, and the abdominal distension scores improved with the use of probiotics that contained Bifidobacterium breve, Bifidobacterium infantis, Lactobacillus casei, or Lactobacillus plantarum species. The authors noted that, overall, the studies showed no clear positive effect of probiotics on quality of life.

The available evidence indicates that probiotics might reduce some symptoms of IBS. However, additional high-quality clinical trials are needed to confirm the specific strain, dose, and duration of treatment required as well as the type of IBS (such as with predominant diarrhea or constipation) that can be treated effectively with probiotics.
Hypercholesterolemia

Some studies have suggested that taking combinations of certain probiotic strains may improve lipid profiles. Specifically, the use of specific probiotics may reduce total and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels. However, study results have been mixed, and more research is needed.

High levels of cholesterol in the blood or cholesterol trapped in arterial walls are risk factors for cardiovascular disease (CVD). Low-density lipoprotein (LDL) carries cholesterol to tissues and arteries. The higher the LDL level, the greater the risk is for CVD. High-density lipoprotein (HDL) carries cholesterol from the tissues to the liver and leads to its excretion. A low level of HDL increases a person’s risk of CVD.

Researchers have studied the use of probiotics to improve lipid profiles. The mechanisms of their effects on cholesterol concentrations include catabolism of cholesterol by increasing:

    Bile salt hydrolase activity, which increases the need for new bile acids and thus reduces serum cholesterol levels [70-72]
    The binding of cholesterol in the small intestine, which reduces the amount that the body absorbs
    The assimilation and incorporation of cholesterol into bacteria [72], thus lowering cholesterol levels in blood
    The production of short-chain fatty acids by lactobacilli and bifidobacteria, which lowers hepatic cholesterol synthesis and regulates cholesterol metabolism [70-73]

A meta-analysis of 30 RCTs with 1,624 participants (mostly adults age 18 years or older) found that administering probiotics for 3 to 12 weeks reduced total cholesterol concentrations by a mean of 7.8 mg/dL and reduced LDL concentrations by a mean of 7.3 mg/dL compared with placebo [74]. In subgroup analyses, the benefits of probiotics were slightly greater in studies that lasted 8 weeks or longer and in participants who had baseline total cholesterol levels higher than 240 mg/dL. Among the strains included in more than three studies, Lactobacillus acidophilus, a mixture of Lactobacillus acidophilus and Bifidobacterium lactis, and Lactobacillus plantarum were associated with significant reductions in total and LDL cholesterol concentrations, but Lactobacillus helveticus and Enterococcus faecium were not. In a smaller meta-analysis of 11 RCTs in 602 adults with normal or high cholesterol levels, those treated with probiotics for 2 to 10 weeks had 6.6 mg/dL lower total cholesterol and 8.5 mg/dL lower LDL cholesterol levels than those treated with placebo, but the probiotic treatment had no significant effects on HDL cholesterol levels [75]. The effects were most pronounced in people who consumed probiotics for more than 4 weeks, in those with hypercholesterolemia, and in those age 45 or older. In both meta-analyses, participants included both healthy adults and adults with hypercholesterolemia, CVD, diabetes, or obesity.

However, the authors of a more recent review of the influence of probiotics on the blood lipid profiles of healthy adults (in 14 studies with a total of 942 adults treated for 15–150 days) found insufficient evidence to conclude that probiotics improve blood lipid levels [76]. Another review found that the use of probiotics that contained multiple strains produced statistically significant reductions in total and LDL cholesterol levels (by 12.0 and 20.1 mg/dL, respectively), whereas trials that used a single strain did not [77].

Overall, research suggests that using a combination of multiple probiotic strains as well as probiotics that contain Lactobacillus acidophilus, a mixture of Lactobacillus acidophilus and Bifidobacterium lactis, or Lactobacillus plantarum might reduce total and LDL cholesterol levels. However, more research is needed to confirm these findings.
Obesity

The microbes of the intestinal tract help extract nutrients and energy from food, which suggests a role for probiotics in the management of body weight. However, while some of the clinical trials that have evaluated the impact of probiotics on obesity-related endpoints have reported promising results, others have reported no effects.

The gut microbiota play an important role in nutrient and energy extraction from food. Research in mice suggests that the gut microbiota affect not only the use of energy from the diet, but also energy expenditure and storage within the host [78]. Whether these effects translate to humans is unknown.

The results of clinical trials that have assessed the impact of probiotics on obesity-related endpoints have been inconsistent. One 12-week clinical trial, for example, randomized 210 healthy adults age 35 to 60 years who had large amounts of visceral fat to consume 200 g/day of fermented milk that contained 107, 106, or 0 (control) CFU of Lactobacillus gasseri SBT2055 (LG2055) per gram of milk [79]. Participants who received 107 or 106 CFU/g milk of Lactobacillus gasseri experienced significant reductions in visceral fat area (mean reductions of 8.5% and 8.2%, respectively), body mass index, waist and hip circumference, and body fat mass compared with the control group. In an RCT, daily supplementation with 3.24 x 108 CFU Lactobacillus rhamnosus CGMCC1.3724 for 24 weeks combined with an energy-restricted diet for the first 12 weeks (500 kcal/day less than estimated calorie needs) did not significantly affect weight loss compared with placebo in 125 adults with obesity [80]. However, among female participants, those who received Lactobacillus had greater reductions in body weight after 12 weeks (loss of 1.8 kg) and 24 weeks (loss of 2.6 kg) than those who received placebo.

A 2017 systematic review of 14 clinical trials, including the two described above, in 1,067 individuals with overweight or obesity showed that probiotics (mostly Lactobacillus administered at various doses for 3 weeks to 6 months) significantly decreased body weight and/or body fat in nine trials, had no effect in three trials, and increased body weight in two trials [81]. Another recent systematic review and meta-analysis of 15 RCTs in 957 individuals with overweight or obesity found that supplementation with various doses and strains of probiotics for 3 to 12 weeks resulted in larger reductions in body weight (by 0.6 kg), body mass index (by 0.27 kg/m2), and fat percentage (by 0.6%) than placebo [82]. However, these effects were small and of questionable clinical significance.

In contrast, a more recent systematic review and meta-analysis, which included 19 randomized trials in 1,412 participants, found that supplementation with probiotics or synbiotics reduced waist circumference slightly (by 0.82 cm) but had no effect on body weight or body mass index, although the quality of evidence was low to moderate [83]. The findings from another meta-analysis of 14 trials in 881 adults, 5 trials in 726 children, and 12 trials in 1,154 infants suggested that probiotics promote the loss of a mean of 0.54 kg in adults, the gain of a mean of 0.20 kg in children, and no significant weight loss or gain in infants [84].

Taken together, these results indicate that the effects of probiotics on body weight and obesity might depend on several factors, including the probiotic strain, dose, and duration, as well as certain characteristics of the user, including age, sex, and baseline body weight. Additional research is needed to understand the potential effects of probiotics on body fat, body weight, and obesity in humans.
Safety Considerations

Probiotics are unlikely to cause harm in healthy people, and side effects are usually minor. However, the use of probiotics has been linked to a few cases of bacteremia, fungemia, and infections that have resulted in severe illness; most of these cases involved individuals who were severely ill or immunocompromised.

Many probiotic strains derive from species with a long history of safe use in foods or from microorganisms that colonize healthy gastrointestinal tracts. For these reasons, common probiotics—such as Bifidobacterium and members of the Lactobacillaceae family—are unlikely to cause harm in healthy people [4]. Side effects of probiotics are usually minor and consist of self-limited gastrointestinal symptoms, such as gas.

However, some clinical trials of probiotics are not designed to adequately address questions about safety, leaving gaps in available safety evidence [85-87]. Moreover, some evidence indicates that probiotics may cause harm in certain populations, including people who are severely ill or immunocompromised. The 2023 FDA press release discussed above expressed concerns about the potential risks of administering probiotics to preterm infants [51].

The use of probiotics has been linked to bacteremia, fungemia (fungi in the blood), or infections that have resulted in severe illness in some cases, most of which involved individuals who were severely ill or immunocompromised [88,89]. However, some case reports did not confirm that the specific strain of probiotics used was the cause of the infection. In other cases, the probiotic strain was confirmed to be the opportunistic pathogen. Because the species used as probiotics can also be normal residents of a patient’s microbiota, such confirmation is important.

At least 60 reports have been published since 1966 of fungemia associated with the use of probiotics that contain the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. In many of these cases, the patients were in an intensive care unit (ICU), were receiving enteral or parenteral nutrition, had a central venous catheter, or had received broad-spectrum antimicrobial treatment [90]. When LGG was introduced into dairy products in Finland in 1990, monitoring of this country’s population through 2000 revealed no increase in the rates of bacteremia (bacteria in the blood) caused by Lactobacillus species [91]. However, a retrospective analysis of 22,174 ICU patients in a Boston hospital found that those who received LGG (typically through a feeding tube) had a markedly higher risk of developing Lactobacillus bacteremia compared to patients who did not receive the probiotic [92]. Of the 522 patients who received LGG, a genome-level analysis identified six cases where the ingested LGG was found in the blood, compared to only two cases among the 21,652 patients who did not receive the LGG.

For individuals with compromised immune function or other serious underlying diseases, the World Gastroenterology Organisation (WGO) advises restricting probiotic use to the strains and indications that have proven efficacy [4]
Probiotic Selection and Use

There are currently no formal recommendations for or against the use of probiotics in healthy people. However, some expert bodies of health professionals provide guidance on the use of specific probiotic strains in people with certain health conditions. These groups also offer guidance for clinicians and consumers on choosing probiotic products.

Expert bodies of health professionals make no recommendations for or against the use of probiotics by healthy people. For people with various health conditions, however, published studies and reviews provide some guidance (as described above) on probiotic species, strains, and doses that might alleviate their symptoms.

The WGO notes that the optimal dose of probiotics depends on the strain and product and recommends that clinicians only advise their patients to use probiotic strains, doses, and durations that have been shown to be beneficial in human studies [4]. The WGO guidelines include a summary of the evidence on specific probiotic strains used in studies for specific gastrointestinal endpoints [4]. Finally, the WGO recommends that probiotic supplement users check the labels of probiotic supplements for recommended storage conditions; for example, some require refrigeration, whereas others can be stored at room temperature.

The International Scientific Association for Probiotics and Prebiotics advises manufacturers to list the total number of CFU—ideally for each strain—through the expiration date or use-by date on the product label [93]. The association also suggests that consumers of these supplements avoid products that list the number of CFU at time of manufacture because this information does not account for declines in CFU over a product’s lifespan.
References

    Hill C, Guarner F, Reid G, Gibson GR, Merenstein DJ, Pot B, et al. The International Scientific Association for Probiotics and Prebiotics consensus statement on the scope and appropriate use of the term probiotic. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol 2014;11:506-14. [PubMed abstract]
    Gibson GR, Hutkins R, Sanders ME, Prescott SL, Reimer RA, Salminen SJ, et al. Expert consensus document: The International Scientific Association for Probiotics and Prebiotics (ISAPP) consensus statement on the definition and scope of prebiotics. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol 2017;14:491-502. [PubMed abstract]
    Salminen S, Collado MC, Endo A, Hill C, Lebeer S, et al. The International Scientific Association of Probiotics and Prebiotics (ISAPP) consensus statement on the definition and scope of postbiotics. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol 2021;18:649-67. [PubMed abstract]
    Guarner F, Sanders ME, Szajewska H, Cohen H, etc. World Gastroenterology Organisation Global Guidelines. Probiotics and prebiotics. World Gastroenterology Organisation, 2023:1-52.
    Zheng J, Wittouck S, Salvetti E, Franz C, Harris HMB, et al. A taxonomic note on the genus Lactobacillus: Description of 23 novel genera, emended description of the genus Lactobacillus Beijerinck 1901, and union of Lactobacillaceae and Leuconostocaceae. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol 2020;70:2782-858. [PubMed abstract]
    Zmora N, Zilberman-Schapira G, Suez J, Mor U, Dori-Bachash M, Bashiardes S, et al. Personalized Gut Mucosal Colonization Resistance to Empiric Probiotics Is Associated with Unique Host and Microbiome Features. Cell 2018;174:1388-405.e21. [PubMed abstract]
    Sanders ME. Probiotics in 2015: their scope and use. J Clin Gastroenterol 2015;49 Suppl 1:S2-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Sanders ME. Clinical use of probiotics: what physicians need to know. Am Fam Physician 2008;78:1026. [PubMed abstract]
    Marco ML, Sanders ME, Gänzle M, Arrieta MC, Cotter PD, et al. The International Scientific Association for Probiotics and Prebiotics (ISAPP) consensus statement on fermented foods. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol 2021;18:196-208. [PubMed abstract]
    Hogan DE, Ivanina EA, Robbins DH. Probiotics: a review for clinical use. Gastroenterology & Endoscopy News 2018:1-7.
    Office of Dietary Supplements. National Institutes of Health. Dietary Supplement Label Database. 2025.
    Merenstein D, Guzzi J, Sanders ME. More Information Needed on Probiotic Supplement Product Labels. J Gen Intern Med 2019;34:2735-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Merenstein DJ, Sanders ME, Tancredi DJ. Probiotics as a Tx resource in primary care. J Fam Pract 2020;69:E1-e10. [PubMed abstract]
    Food and Drug Administration. Policy regarding quantitative labeling of dietary supplements containing live microbials: Guidance for industry. 2018.
    Avena-Woods C. Overview of atopic dermatitis. Am J Manag Care 2017;23:S115-S23. [PubMed abstract]
    Li L, Han Z, Niu X, Zhang G, Jia Y, et al. Probiotic Supplementation for Prevention of Atopic Dermatitis in Infants and Children: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. Am J Clin Dermatol 2019;20:367-77. [PubMed abstract]
    Szajewska H, Horvath A. Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG in the primary prevention of eczema in children: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Nutrients 2018;10. [PubMed abstract]
    Huang R, Ning H, Shen M, Li J, Zhang J, Chen X. Probiotics for the treatment of atopic dermatitis in children: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Front Cell Infect Microbiol 2017;7:392. [PubMed abstract]
    Zhao M, Shen C, Ma L. Treatment efficacy of probiotics on atopic dermatitis, zooming in on infants: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Int J Dermatol 2018;57:635-41. [PubMed abstract]
    Makrgeorgou A, Leonardi-Bee J, Bath-Hextall FJ, Murrell DF, Tang ML, Roberts A, et al. Probiotics for treating eczema. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2018;11:CD006135. [PubMed abstract]
    Guarino A, Ashkenazi S, Gendrel D, Lo Vecchio A, Shamir R, Szajewska H, et al. European Society for Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition/European Society for Pediatric Infectious Diseases evidence-based guidelines for the management of acute gastroenteritis in children in Europe: update 2014. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr 2014;59:132-52. [PubMed abstract]
    Collinson S, Deans A, Padua-Zamora A, Gregorio GV, Li C, et al. Probiotics for treating acute infectious diarrhoea. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2020;12:Cd003048. [PubMed abstract]
    Caffarelli C, Cardinale F, Povesi-Dascola C, Dodi I, Mastrorilli V, Ricci G. Use of probiotics in pediatric infectious diseases. Expert Rev Anti Infect Ther 2015;13:1517-35. [PubMed abstract]
    Szajewska H, Skorka A, Ruszczynski M, Gieruszczak-Bialek D. Meta-analysis: Lactobacillus GG for treating acute gastroenteritis in children--updated analysis of randomised controlled trials. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2013;38:467-76. [PubMed abstract]
    Feizizadeh S, Salehi-Abargouei A, Akbari V. Efficacy and safety of Saccharomyces boulardii for acute diarrhea. Pediatrics 2014;134:e176-91.
    Freedman SB, Williamson-Urquhart S, Farion KJ, Gouin S, Willan AR, Poonai N, et al. Multicenter Trial of a Combination Probiotic for Children with Gastroenteritis. N Engl J Med 2018;379:2015-26. [PubMed abstract]
    Schnadower D, Tarr PI, Casper TC, Gorelick MH, Dean JM, O'Connell KJ, et al. Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG versus Placebo for Acute Gastroenteritis in Children. N Engl J Med 2018;379:2002-14. [PubMed abstract]
    Szajewska H, Guarino A, Hojsak I, Indrio F, Kolacek S, Shamir R, et al. Use of probiotics for management of acute gastroenteritis: a position paper by the ESPGHAN Working Group for Probiotics and Prebiotics. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr 2014;58:531-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Allen SJ, Martinez EG, Gregorio GV, Dans LF. Probiotics for treating acute infectious diarrhoea. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2010:CD003048. [PubMed abstract]
    Szajewska H, Berni Canani R, Domellöf M, Guarino A, Hojsak I, et al. Probiotics for the Management of Pediatric Gastrointestinal Disorders: Position Paper of the ESPGHAN Special Interest Group on Gut Microbiota and Modifications. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr 2023;76:232-47. [PubMed abstract]
    Su GL, Ko CW, Bercik P, Falck-Ytter Y, Sultan S, et al.. AGA clinical practice guidelines on the role of probiotics in the management of gastrointestinal disorders. Gastroenterology 2020; 159: 697-705. [PubMed abstract]
    Ki Cha B, Mun Jung S, Hwan Choi C, Song ID, Woong Lee H, Joon Kim H, et al. The effect of a multispecies probiotic mixture on the symptoms and fecal microbiota in diarrhea-dominant irritable bowel syndrome: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. J Clin Gastroenterol 2012;46:220-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Silverman MA, Konnikova L, Gerber JS. Impact of antibiotics on necrotizing enterocolitis and antibiotic-associated diarrhea. Gastroenterol Clin North Am 2017;46:61-76. [PubMed abstract]
    Blaabjerg S, Artzi DM, Aabenhus R. Probiotics for the prevention of antibiotic-associated diarrhea in outpatients-a systematic review and meta-analysis. Antibiotics (Basel) 2017;6. [PubMed abstract]
    Jafarnejad S, Shab-Bidar S, Speakman JR, Parastui K, Daneshi-Maskooni M, Djafarian K. Probiotics reduce the risk of antibiotic-associated diarrhea in adults (18-64 years) but not the elderly (>65 years): a meta-analysis. Nutr Clin Pract 2016;31:502-13. [PubMed abstract]
    Szajewska H, Kołodziej M. Systematic review with meta-analysis: Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG in the prevention of antibiotic-associated diarrhoea in children and adults. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2015;42:1149-57. [PubMed abstract]
    Szajewska H, Kolodziej M. Systematic review with meta-analysis: Saccharomyces boulardii in the prevention of antibiotic-associated diarrhoea. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2015;42:793-801. [PubMed abstract]
    Working Group of the National Advisory Council of Child Health and Human Development (NACHHD). Necrotizing Enterocolitis (NEC) in Preterm Infants, Report to Secretary, Department of Health and Human Services. 2024.
    Shaw AG, Sim K, Rose G, Wooldridge DJ, Li MS, et al. Premature neonatal gut microbial community patterns supporting an epithelial TLR-mediated pathway for necrotizing enterocolitis. BMC Microbiol 2021;21:225. [PubMed abstract]
    Lai Z, Gong F. Protective Effects of Lactobacillus reuteri on Intestinal Barrier Function in a Mouse Model of Neonatal Necrotizing Enterocolitis. Am J Perinatol 2024;41:e386-e93. [PubMed abstract]
    Pan LL, Sun Y, Dong X, Ren Z, Li B, et al. Infant feces-derived Lactobacillus gasseri FWJL-4 mitigates experimental necrotizing enterocolitis via acetate production. Gut Microbes 2024;16:2430541. [PubMed abstract]
    Wang W, Geng M, Zhu C, Huang L, Zhang Y, et al. Protective Effects and Mechanism of a Novel Probiotic Strain Ligilactobacillus salivarius YL20 against Cronobacter sakazakii-Induced Necrotizing Enterocolitis In Vitro and In Vivo. Nutrients 2022;14. [PubMed abstract]
    Blackwood BP, Yuan CY, Wood DR, Nicolas JD, Grothaus JS, et al. Probiotic Lactobacillus Species Strengthen Intestinal Barrier Function and Tight Junction Integrity in Experimental Necrotizing Enterocolitis. J Probiotics Health 2017;5. [PubMed abstract]
    Preidis GA, Berrington JE. Probiotics for preterms: sharing complex decision-making. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol 2025;22:5-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Underwood MA. Probiotics and the prevention of necrotizing enterocolitis. J Pediatr Surg 2019;54:405-12. [PubMed abstract]
    Sharif S, Meader N, Oddie SJ, Rojas-Reyers, mX, McGuire W. Probiotics to prevent necrotizing enterocolitis in very preterm infants or very low birth weight infants. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2023:CD005496. [PubMed abstract]
    Preidis GA, Weizman AV, Kashyap PC Morgan RL. AGA technical review on the role of probiotics in the management of gastrointestinal disorders. Gastroenterology 2020; 159: 708-38. [PubMed abstract]
    Darmstadt GL, Al Jaifi NH, Arif S, Bahl R, Blennow M, et al. New World Health Organization recommendations for care of preterm or low birth weight infants: health policy. eClinicalMedicine 2023;63. [PubMed abstract]
    Wang Y, Florez ID, Morgan RL, Foroutan F, Chang Y, et al.. Probiotics, Prebiotics, Lactoferrin, and Combination Products for Prevention of Mortality and Morbidity in Preterm Infants: A Systematic Review and Network Meta-Analysis. JAMA Pediatr. 2023 Oct 2:e233849. [PubMed abstract]
    van den Akker CHP, van Goudoever JB, Shamir R, Domellöf M, Embleton ND, et al. Probiotics and Preterm Infants: A Position Paper by the European Society for Paediatric Gastroenterology Hepatology and Nutrition Committee on Nutrition and the European Society for Paediatric Gastroenterology Hepatology and Nutrition Working Group for Probiotics and Prebiotics. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr 2020;70:664-80. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. FDA Raises Concerns About Probiotic Products Sold for Use in Hospitalized Preterm Infants. 2023.
    Sairenji T, Collins KL Evans DV. An update on inflammatory bowel disease. Prim Care 2017; 44: 673-92. [PubMed abstract]
    Ghouri YA, Richards DM, Rahimi EF, Krill JT, Jelinek KA DuPont AW. Systematic review of randomized controlled trials of probiotics, prebiotics, and synbiotics in inflammatory bowel disease. Clin Exp Gastroenterol 2014; 7: 473-87. [PubMed abstract]
    Derikx LA, Dieleman LA Hoentjen F. Probiotics and prebiotics in ulcerative colitis. Best Pract Res Clin Gastroenterol 2016; 30: 55-71. [PubMed abstract]
    Wilkins T Sequoia J. Probiotics for gastrointestinal conditions: a summary of the evidence. Am Fam Physician 2017; 96: 170-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Lamb CA, Kennedy NA, Raine T, Hendy PA, Smith PJ, et al. British Society of Gastroenterology consensus guidelines on the management of inflammatory bowel disease in adults. Gut 2019;68:s1-s106. [PubMed abstract]
    Kaur L, Gordon M, Baines PA, Iheozor-Ejiofor Z, Sinopoulou V Akobeng AK. Probiotics for induction of remission in ulcerative colitis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2020; 3: Cd005573. [PubMed abstract]
    Iheozor-Ejiofor Z, Kaur L, Gordon M, Baines PA, Sinopoulou V Akobeng AK. Probiotics for maintenance of remission in ulcerative colitis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2020; 3: Cd007443. [PubMed abstract]
    American Gastroenterological Association. Consideration for use of probiotics in gastrointestinal diseases: clinical decision support tool. Gastroenterology 2020; 159: 706. [PubMed abstract]
    Staudacher HM, Whelan K. Altered gastrointestinal microbiota in irritable bowel syndrome and its modification by diet: probiotics, prebiotics and the low FODMAP diet. Proc Nutr Soc 2016;75:306-18. [PubMed abstract]
    Zhuang X, Xiong L, Li L, Li M, Chen M. Alterations of gut microbiota in patients with irritable bowel syndrome: A systematic review and meta-analysis. J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2017;32:28-38. [PubMed abstract]
    Ford AC, Quigley EM, Lacy BE, Lembo AJ, Saito YA, Schiller LR, et al. Efficacy of prebiotics, probiotics, and synbiotics in irritable bowel syndrome and chronic idiopathic constipation: systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Gastroenterol 2014;109:1547-61; quiz 6, 62. [PubMed abstract]
    Didari T, Mozaffari S, Nikfar S, Abdollahi M. Effectiveness of probiotics in irritable bowel syndrome: Updated systematic review with meta-analysis. World J Gastroenterol 2015;21:3072-84. [PubMed abstract]
    Lorenzo-Zuniga V, Llop E, Suarez C, Alvarez B, Abreu L, Espadaler J, et al. I.31, a new combination of probiotics, improves irritable bowel syndrome-related quality of life. World J Gastroenterol 2014;20:8709-16. [PubMed abstract]
    Williams EA, Stimpson J, Wang D, Plummer S, Garaiova I, Barker ME, et al. Clinical trial: a multistrain probiotic preparation significantly reduces symptoms of irritable bowel syndrome in a double-blind placebo-controlled study. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2009;29:97-103. [PubMed abstract]
    McKenzie YA, Bowyer RK, Leach H, Gulia P, Horobin J, O'Sullivan NA, et al. British Dietetic Association systematic review and evidence-based practice guidelines for the dietary management of irritable bowel syndrome in adults (2016 update). J Hum Nutr Diet 2016;29:549-75. [PubMed abstract]
    McKenzie YA, Thompson J, Gulia P, Lomer MC. British Dietetic Association systematic review of systematic reviews and evidence-based practice guidelines for the use of probiotics in the management of irritable bowel syndrome in adults (2016 update). J Hum Nutr Diet 2016;29:576-92. [PubMed abstract]
    Principi N, Cozzali R, Farinelli E, Brusaferro A, Esposito S. Gut dysbiosis and irritable bowel syndrome: The potential role of probiotics. J Infect 2018;76:111-20. [PubMed abstract]
    Ortiz-Lucas M, Tobias A, Saz P, Sebastian JJ. Effect of probiotic species on irritable bowel syndrome symptoms: A bring up to date meta-analysis. Rev Esp Enferm Dig 2013;105:19-36. [PubMed abstract]
    Tsai CC, Lin PP, Hsieh YM, Zhang ZY, Wu HC, Huang CC. Cholesterol-lowering potentials of lactic acid bacteria based on bile-salt hydrolase activity and effect of potent strains on cholesterol metabolism in vitro and in vivo. ScientificWorldJournal 2014;2014:690752. [PubMed abstract]
    Kumar R, Grover S, Batish VK. Bile salt hydrolase (Bsh) activity screening of lactobacilli: in vitro selection of indigenous Lactobacillus strains with potential bile salt hydrolysing and cholesterol-lowering ability. Probiotics Antimicrob Proteins 2012;4:162-72. [PubMed abstract]
    Bosch M, Fuentes MC, Audivert S, Bonachera MA, Peiro S, Cune J. Lactobacillus plantarum CECT 7527, 7528 and 7529: probiotic candidates to reduce cholesterol levels. J Sci Food Agric 2014;94:803-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Ishimwe N, Daliri EB, Lee BH, Fang F, Du G. The perspective on cholesterol-lowering mechanisms of probiotics. Mol Nutr Food Res 2015;59:94-105. [PubMed abstract]
    Cho YA, Kim J. Effect of probiotics on blood lipid concentrations: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Medicine (Baltimore) 2015;94:e1714. [PubMed abstract]
    Shimizu M, Hashiguchi M, Shiga T, Tamura HO, Mochizuki M. Meta-analysis: effects of probiotic supplementation on lipid profiles in normal to mildly hypercholesterolemic individuals. PLoS One 2015;10:e0139795. [PubMed abstract]
    Khalesi S, Bellissimo N, Vandelanotte C, Williams S, Stanley D, Irwin C. A review of probiotic supplementation in healthy adults: helpful or hype? Eur J Clin Nutr 2019;73:24-37. [PubMed abstract]
    Sun J, Buys N. Effects of probiotics consumption on lowering lipids and CVD risk factors: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Ann Med 2015;47:430-40. [PubMed abstract]
    Davis CD. The gut microbiome and its role in obesity. Nutr Today 2016;51:167-74. [PubMed abstract]
    Kadooka Y, Sato M, Ogawa A, Miyoshi M, Uenishi H, Ogawa H, et al. Effect of Lactobacillus gasseri SBT2055 in fermented milk on abdominal adiposity in adults in a randomised controlled trial. Br J Nutr 2013;110:1696-703. [PubMed abstract]
    Sanchez M, Darimont C, Drapeau V, Emady-Azar S, Lepage M, Rezzonico E, et al. Effect of Lactobacillus rhamnosus CGMCC1.3724 supplementation on weight loss and maintenance in obese men and women. Br J Nutr 2014;111:1507-19. [PubMed abstract]
    Crovesy L, Ostrowski M, Ferreira D, Rosado EL, Soares-Mota M. Effect of Lactobacillus on body weight and body fat in overweight subjects: a systematic review of randomized controlled clinical trials. Int J Obes (Lond) 2017;41:1607-14. [PubMed abstract]
    Borgeraas H, Johnson LK, Skattebu J, Hertel JK, Hjelmesaeth J. Effects of probiotics on body weight, body mass index, fat mass and fat percentage in subjects with overweight or obesity: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Obes Rev 2018;19:219-32. [PubMed abstract]
    Suzumura EA, Bersch-Ferreira Â C, Torreglosa CR, da Silva JT, Coqueiro AY, et al. Effects of oral supplementation with probiotics or synbiotics in overweight and obese adults: a systematic review and meta-analyses of randomized trials. Nutr Rev 2019;77:430-50. [PubMed abstract]
    Dror T, Dickstein Y, Dubourg G, Paul M. Microbiota manipulation for weight change. Microb Pathog 2017;106:146-61. [PubMed abstract]
    Hempel S, Newberry S, Ruelaz A, Wang Z, Miles JN, et al. Safety of probiotics used to reduce risk and prevent or treat disease. Evid Rep Technol Assess (Full Rep) 2011:1-645. [PubMed abstract]
    Bafeta A, Koh M, Riveros C, Ravaud P. Harms reporting in randomized controlled trials of interventions aimed at modifying microbiota: a systematic review. Ann Intern Med 2018;169:240-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Cohen PA. Probiotic safety--no guarantees. JAMA Intern Med 2018;178:1577-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Didari T, Solki S, Mozaffari S, Nikfar S, Abdollahi M. A systematic review of the safety of probiotics. Expert Opin Drug Saf 2014;13:227-39. [PubMed abstract]
    Borriello SP, Hammes WP, Holzapfel W, Marteau P, Schrezenmeir J, Vaara M, et al. Safety of probiotics that contain lactobacilli or bifidobacteria. Clin Infect Dis 2003;36:775-80. [PubMed abstract]
    Munoz P, Bouza E, Cuenca-Estrella M, Eiros JM, Perez MJ, Sanchez-Somolinos M, et al. Saccharomyces cerevisiae fungemia: an emerging infectious disease. Clin Infect Dis 2005;40:1625-34. [PubMed abstract]
    Salminen MK, Tynkkynen S, Rautelin H, Saxelin M, Vaara M, Ruutu P, et al. Lactobacillus bacteremia during a rapid increase in probiotic use of Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG in Finland. Clin Infect Dis 2002;35:1155-60. [PubMed abstract]
    Yellin I, Flett KB, Merakou C, Mehrotra P, Stam J, Snesrud E, et al. Genomic and epidemiological evidence of bacterial transmission from probiotic capsule to blood in ICU patients. Nat Med 2019;25:1728-32. [PubMed abstract]
    International Scientific Association for Probiotics and Prebiotics. Deciphering a probiotic label. 2022.

Disclaimer

This fact sheet by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Office of Dietary Supplements (ODS) provides information that should not take the place of medical advice. We encourage you to talk to your health care providers (doctor, registered dietitian, pharmacist, etc.) about your interest in, questions about, or use of dietary supplements and what may be best for your overall health. Any mention in this publication of a specific product or service, or recommendation from an organization or professional society, does not represent an endorsement by ODS of that product, service, or expert advice.

Updated: March 25, 2025


 Riboflavin: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals (original version)
Riboflavin: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals
Table of Contents

    Introduction
    Recommended Intakes
    Sources of Riboflavin
    Riboflavin Intakes and Status
    Riboflavin Deficiency
    Groups at Risk of Riboflavin Inadequacy
    Riboflavin and Health
    Health Risks from Excessive Riboflavin
    Interactions with Medications
    Riboflavin and Healthful Diets
    References
    Disclaimer

Introduction

Riboflavin (also known as vitamin B2) is one of the B vitamins, which are all water soluble. Riboflavin is naturally present in some foods, added to some food products, and available as a dietary supplement. This vitamin is an essential component of two major coenzymes, flavin mononucleotide (FMN; also known as riboflavin-5'-phosphate) and flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD). These coenzymes play major roles in energy production; cellular function, growth, and development; and metabolism of fats, drugs, and steroids [1-3]. The conversion of the amino acid tryptophan to niacin (sometimes referred to as vitamin B3) requires FAD [3]. Similarly, the conversion of vitamin B6 to the coenzyme pyridoxal 5'-phosphate needs FMN. In addition, riboflavin helps maintain normal levels of homocysteine, an amino acid in the blood [1].

More than 90% of dietary riboflavin is in the form of FAD or FMN; the remaining 10% is comprised of the free form and glycosides or esters [2,3]. Most riboflavin is absorbed in the proximal small intestine [4]. The body absorbs little riboflavin from single doses beyond 27 mg and stores only small amounts of riboflavin in the liver, heart, and kidneys. When excess amounts are consumed, they are either not absorbed or the small amount that is absorbed is excreted in urine [3].

Bacteria in the large intestine produce free riboflavin that can be absorbed by the large intestine in amounts that depend on the diet. More riboflavin is produced after ingestion of vegetable-based than meat-based foods [2].

Riboflavin is yellow and naturally fluorescent when exposed to ultraviolet light [1]. Moreover, ultraviolet and visible light can rapidly inactivate riboflavin and its derivatives. Because of this sensitivity, lengthy light therapy to treat jaundice in newborns or skin disorders can lead to riboflavin deficiency. The risk of riboflavin loss from exposure to light is the reason why milk is not typically stored in glass containers [3,5].

Riboflavin status is not routinely measured in healthy people. A stable and sensitive measure of riboflavin deficiency is the erythrocyte glutathione reductase activity coefficient (EGRAC), which is based on the ratio between this enzyme's in vitro activity in the presence of FAD to that without added FAD [1,6,7]. The most appropriate EGRAC thresholds for indicating normal or abnormal riboflavin status are uncertain [6]. An EGRAC of 1.2 or less is usually used to indicate adequate riboflavin status, 1.2–1.4 to indicate marginal deficiency, and greater than 1.4 to indicate riboflavin deficiency [1,6]. However, a higher EGRAC does not necessarily correlate with the degree of riboflavin deficiency. Furthermore, the EGRAC cannot be used in people with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency, which is present in about 10% of African Americans [8].

Another widely used measure of riboflavin status is fluorometric measurement of urinary excretion over 24 hours (expressed as total amount of riboflavin excreted or in relation to the amount of creatinine excreted) [2]. Because the body can store only small amounts of riboflavin, urinary excretion reflects dietary intake until tissues are saturated [6]. Total riboflavin excretion in healthy, riboflavin-replete adults is at least 120 mcg/day; a rate of less than 40 mcg/day indicates deficiency [1,6]. This technique is less accurate for reflecting long-term riboflavin status than EGRAC [1,6]. Also, urinary excretion levels can decrease with age and increase with exposure to stress and certain drugs, and the amount excreted strongly reflects recent intake [1].
Recommended Intakes

Intake recommendations for riboflavin and other nutrients are provided in the Dietary Reference Intakes (DRIs) developed by the Food and Nutrition Board (FNB) at the Institute of Medicine of the National Academies [3]. DRI is the general term for a set of reference values used for planning and assessing nutrient intakes of healthy people. These values, which vary by age and sex, include the following:

    Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA): Average daily level of intake sufficient to meet the nutrient requirements of nearly all (97%–98%) healthy individuals; often used to plan nutritionally adequate diets for individuals
    Adequate Intake (AI): Intake at this level is assumed to ensure nutritional adequacy; established when evidence is insufficient to develop an RDA
    Estimated Average Requirement (EAR): Average daily level of intake estimated to meet the requirements of 50% of healthy individuals; usually used to assess the nutrient intakes of groups of people and to plan nutritionally adequate diets for them; can also be used to assess the nutrient intakes of individuals
    Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL): Maximum daily intake unlikely to cause adverse health effects

Table 1 lists the current RDAs for riboflavin [3]. For infants from birth to 12 months, the FNB established an AI for riboflavin that is equivalent to the mean intake of riboflavin in healthy, breastfed infants.
Table 1: Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDAs) for Riboflavin [3] Age 	Male 	Female 	Pregnancy 	Lactation
Birth to 6 months* 	0.3 mg 	0.3 mg 		
7–12 months* 	0.4 mg 	0.4 mg 		
1–3 years 	0.5 mg 	0.5 mg 		
4–8 years 	0.6 mg 	0.6 mg 		
9–13 years 	0.9 mg 	0.9 mg 		
14–18 years 	1.3 mg 	1.0 mg 	1.4 mg 	1.6 mg
19–50 years 	1.3 mg 	1.1 mg 	1.4 mg 	1.6 mg
51+ years 	1.3 mg 	1.1 mg 		

* AI
Sources of Riboflavin
Food

Foods that are particularly rich in riboflavin include eggs, organ meats (kidneys and liver), lean meats, and milk [2,4]. Some vegetables also contain riboflavin. Grains and cereals are fortified with riboflavin in the United States and many other countries [4]. The largest dietary contributors of total riboflavin intake in U.S. men and women are milk and milk drinks, bread and bread products, mixed foods whose main ingredient is meat, ready-to-eat cereals, and mixed foods whose main ingredient is grain [3]. The riboflavin in most foods is in the form of FAD, although the main form in eggs and milk is free riboflavin [9].

About 95% of riboflavin in the form of FAD or FMN from food is bioavailable up to a maximum of about 27 mg of riboflavin per meal or dose [3].The bioavailability of free riboflavin is similar to that of FAD and FMN [9,10]. Because riboflavin is soluble in water, about twice as much riboflavin content is lost in cooking water when foods are boiled as when they are prepared in other ways, such as by steaming or microwaving [11].

Several food sources of riboflavin are listed in Table 2.
Table 2: Riboflavin Content of Selected Foods [12] Food 	Milligrams
(mg) per
serving 	Percent
DV*
Beef liver, pan fried, 3 ounces 	2.9 	223
Breakfast cereals, fortified with 100% of the DV for riboflavin, 1 serving 	1.3 	100
Oats, instant, fortified, cooked with water, 1 cup 	1.1 	85
Yogurt, plain, fat free, 1 cup 	0.6 	46
Milk, 2% fat, 1 cup 	0.5 	38
Beef, tenderloin steak, boneless, trimmed of fat, grilled, 3 ounces 	0.4 	31
Clams, mixed species, cooked, moist heat, 3 ounces 	0.4 	31
Almonds, dry roasted, 1 ounce 	0.3 	23
Cheese, Swiss, 3 ounces 	0.3 	23
Mushrooms, portabella, sliced, grilled, ½ cup 	0.2 	15
Rotisserie chicken, breast meat only, 3 ounces 	0.2 	15
Egg, whole, scrambled, 1 large 	0.2 	15
Quinoa, cooked, 1 cup 	0.2 	15
Bagel, plain, enriched, 1 medium (3½"–4" diameter) 	0.2 	15
Salmon, pink, canned, 3 ounces 	0.2 	15
Spinach, raw, 1 cup 	0.1 	8
Apple, with skin, 1 large 	0.1 	8
Kidney beans, canned, 1 cup 	0.1 	8
Macaroni, elbow shaped, whole wheat, cooked, 1 cup 	0.1 	8
Bread, whole wheat, 1 slice 	0.1 	8
Cod, Atlantic, cooked, dry heat, 3 ounces 	0.1 	8
Sunflower seeds, toasted, 1 ounce 	0.1 	8
Tomatoes, crushed, canned, ½ cup 	0.1 	8
Rice, white, enriched, long grain, cooked, ½ cup 	0.1 	8
Rice, brown, long grain, cooked, ½ cup 	0 	0

*DV = Daily Value. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) developed DVs to help consumers compare the nutrient contents of foods and dietary supplements within the context of a total diet. The DV for riboflavin is 1.3 mg for adults and children age 4 years and older [13]. FDA does not require food labels to list riboflavin content unless riboflavin has been added to the food. Foods providing 20% or more of the DV are considered to be high sources of a nutrient, but foods providing lower percentages of the DV also contribute to a healthful diet.

The U.S. Department of Agriculture's (USDA's) FoodData Central [12] lists the nutrient content of many foods and provides a comprehensive list of foods containing riboflavin arranged by nutrient content and food name.
Dietary supplements

Riboflavin is available in many dietary supplements. Multivitamin/mineral supplements with riboflavin commonly provide 1.3 mg riboflavin (100% of the DV) [14]. Supplements containing riboflavin only or B-complex vitamins (that include riboflavin) are also available. In most supplements, riboflavin is in the free form, but some supplements have riboflavin 5'-phosphate.
Riboflavin Intakes and Status

Most people in the United States consume the recommended amounts of riboflavin. An analysis of data from the 2003–2006 National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) showed that less than 6% of the U.S. population has an intake of riboflavin from foods and supplements below the EAR [15]. An analysis of self-reported data from the 1999–2004 NHANES found that intakes of riboflavin were higher in lacto-ovo vegetarians (2.3 mg/day) than nonvegetarians (2.1 mg/day) [16].

Among children and teens, the average daily riboflavin intake from foods is 1.8 mg for age 2–5 years, 1.9 mg for age 6–11, and 2.1 mg for age 12–19 [17]. In adults, the average daily riboflavin intake from foods is 2.5 mg in men and 1.8 mg in women. The average daily riboflavin intake from foods and supplements in children and teens is 2.1 mg for age 2–5 years, 2.2 mg for age 6–11, and 2.3 mg for age 12–19. In adults age 20 and older, the average daily riboflavin intake from foods and supplements is 4.5 mg in men and 4.7 mg in women.
Riboflavin Deficiency

Riboflavin deficiency is extremely rare in the United States. In addition to inadequate intake, causes of riboflavin deficiency can include endocrine abnormalities (such as thyroid hormone insufficiency) and some diseases [1]. The signs and symptoms of riboflavin deficiency (also known as ariboflavinosis) include skin disorders, hyperemia (excess blood) and edema of the mouth and throat, angular stomatitis (lesions at the corners of the mouth), cheilosis (swollen, cracked lips), hair loss, reproductive problems, sore throat, itchy and red eyes, and degeneration of the liver and nervous system [1-3,8]. People with riboflavin deficiency typically have deficiencies of other nutrients, so some of these signs and symptoms might reflect these other deficiencies. Severe riboflavin deficiency can impair the metabolism of other nutrients, especially other B vitamins, through diminished levels of flavin coenzymes [3]. Anemia and cataracts can develop if riboflavin deficiency is severe and prolonged [1].

The earlier changes associated with riboflavin deficiency are easily reversed. However, riboflavin supplements rarely reverse later anatomical changes (such as formation of cataracts) [1].
Groups at Risk of Riboflavin Inadequacy

The following groups are among those most likely to have inadequate riboflavin status.
Vegetarian athletes

Exercise produces stress in the metabolic pathways that use riboflavin [18]. The Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics, Dietitians of Canada, and the American College of Sports Medicine state that vegetarian athletes are at risk of riboflavin deficiency because of their increased need for this nutrient and because some vegetarians exclude all animal products (including milk, yogurt, cheese, and eggs), which tend to be good sources of riboflavin, from their diets [19]. These associations recommend that vegetarian athletes consult a sports dietitian to avoid this potential problem.
Pregnant and lactating women and their infants

Pregnant or lactating women who rarely consume meats or dairy products (such as those living in developing countries and some vegetarians in the United States) are at risk of riboflavin deficiency, which can have adverse effects on the health of both mothers and their infants [2]. Riboflavin deficiency during pregnancy, for example, can increase the risk of preeclampsia [20]. The limited evidence on the benefits of riboflavin supplements during pregnancy in both developed and developing countries is mixed [21-23].

Riboflavin intakes during pregnancy have a positive association with infant birth weight and length [24]. Infants of mothers with riboflavin deficiency or low dietary intakes (less than 1.2 mg/day) during pregnancy have a higher risk of deficiency and of certain birth defects (such as outflow tract defects of the heart) [22,25]. However, maternal riboflavin intake has no association with the risk of orofacial clefts in infants [26].

In well-nourished women, riboflavin concentrations in breast milk range from 180 to 800 mcg/L and concentrations of riboflavin in breast milk increase over time [27,28]. In developing countries, in contrast, riboflavin levels in breast milk range from 160 to 220 mcg/L [27].
People who are vegan and/or consume little milk

In people who eat meat and dairy products, these foods contribute a substantial proportion of riboflavin in the diet. For this reason, people who live in developing countries and have limited intakes of meat and dairy products have an increased risk of riboflavin deficiency [29,30]. Vegans and those who consume little milk in developed countries are also at risk of riboflavin inadequacy [31-35].
People with riboflavin transporter deficiency

Riboflavin transporter deficiency (formerly known as Brown-Vialetto-Van Laere or Fazio-Londe syndrome) is a rare neurological disorder. It can begin between infancy and young adulthood and is associated with hearing loss, bulbar palsy (a motor-neuron disease), respiratory difficulties, and other symptoms [36,37]. The disease is caused by mutations in the SLC52A3 or SLC52A2 genes, which encode riboflavin transporters. As a result, these patients cannot properly absorb and transport riboflavin, so they develop riboflavin deficiency. Although no cure exists for riboflavin transporter deficiency, high-dose riboflavin supplementation can be a life-saving treatment in this population, especially when it is initiated soon after symptom onset.
Riboflavin and Health

This section focuses on two conditions in which riboflavin might play a role: migraine headaches and cancer.
Migraine headaches

Migraine headaches typically produce intense pulsing or throbbing pain in one area of the head [38]. These headaches are sometimes preceded or accompanied by aura (transient focal neurological symptoms before or during the headaches). Mitochondrial dysfunction is thought to play a causal role in some types of migraine [39]. Because riboflavin is required for mitochondrial function, researchers are studying the potential use of riboflavin to prevent or treat migraine headaches [40].

Some, but not all, of the few small studies conducted to date have found evidence of a beneficial effect of riboflavin supplements on migraine headaches in adults and children. In a randomized trial in 55 adults with migraine, 400 mg/day riboflavin reduced the frequency of migraine attacks by two per month compared to placebo [41]. In a retrospective study in 41 children (mean age 13 years) in Italy, 200 or 400 mg/day riboflavin for 3 to 6 months significantly reduced the frequency (from 21.7 ± 13.7 to 13.2 ± 11.8 migraine attacks over a 3-month period) and intensity of migraine headaches during treatment [42]. The beneficial effects lasted throughout the 1.5-year follow-up period after treatment ended. However, two small randomized studies in children found that 50 to 200 mg/day riboflavin did not reduce the number of migraine headaches or headache severity compared to placebo [43,44].

The Quality Standards Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology and the American Headache Society concluded that riboflavin is probably effective for preventing migraine headaches and recommended offering it for this purpose [45]. The Canadian Headache Society recommends 400 mg/day riboflavin for migraine headache prevention, noting that although the evidence supporting this recommendation is of low quality, there is some evidence for benefit and side effects (such as discolored urine) are minimal [46].
Cancer prevention

Experts have theorized that riboflavin might help prevent the DNA damage caused by many carcinogens by acting as a coenzyme with several different cytochrome P450 enzymes [1]. However, data on the relationship between riboflavin and cancer prevention or treatment are limited and study findings are mixed.

A few large observational studies have produced conflicting results on the relationship between riboflavin intakes and lung cancer risk. A prospective study followed 41,514 current, former, and never smokers in the Melbourne Collaborative Cohort Study for 15 years, on average [47]. The average riboflavin intake among all participants was 2.5 mg/day. The results showed a significant inverse association between dietary riboflavin intake and lung cancer risk in current smokers (fifth versus first quintile) but not former or never smokers. However, another cohort study in 385,747 current, former, and never smokers who were followed for up to 12 years in the European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition found no association between riboflavin intakes and colorectal cancer risk in any of the three groups [48]. Moreover, the prospective Canadian National Breast Screening Study showed no association between dietary intakes or serum levels of riboflavin and lung cancer risk in 89,835 women age 40–59 from the general population over 16.3 years, on average [49].

Observational studies on the relationship between riboflavin intakes and colorectal cancer risk have not yielded conclusive results either. An analysis of data on 88,045 postmenopausal women in the Women's Health Initiative Observational Study showed that total intakes of riboflavin from both foods and supplements were associated with a lower risk of colorectal cancer [50]. A study that followed 2,349 individuals with cancer and 4,168 individuals without cancer participating in the Netherlands Cohort Study on Diet and Cancer for 13 years found no significant association between riboflavin and proximal colon cancer risk among women [51].

Future studies, including clinical trials, are needed to clarify the relationship between riboflavin intakes and various types of cancer and determine whether riboflavin supplements might reduce cancer risk.
Health Risks from Excessive Riboflavin

Intakes of riboflavin from food that are many times the RDA have no observable toxicity, possibly because riboflavin's solubility and capacity to be absorbed in the gastrointestinal tract are limited [1,3]. Because adverse effects from high riboflavin intakes from foods or supplements (400 mg/day for at least 3 months) have not been reported, the FNB did not establish ULs for riboflavin [3]. The limited data available on riboflavin's adverse effects do not mean, however, that high intakes have no adverse effects, and the FNB urges people to be cautious about consuming excessive amounts of riboflavin [3].
Interactions with Medications

Riboflavin is not known to have any clinically relevant interactions with medications.
Riboflavin and Healthful Diets

The federal government's 2020–2025 Dietary Guidelines for Americans notes that "Because foods provide an array of nutrients and other components that have benefits for health, nutritional needs should be met primarily through foods. ... In some cases, fortified foods and dietary supplements are useful when it is not possible otherwise to meet needs for one or more nutrients (e.g., during specific life stages such as pregnancy)."

For more information about building a healthy dietary pattern, refer to the Dietary Guidelines for Americans and the U.S. Department of Agriculture's (USDA's) MyPlate.

The Dietary Guidelines for Americans describes a healthy dietary pattern as one that

    Includes a variety of vegetables; fruits; grains (at least half whole grains); fat-free and low-fat milk, yogurt, and cheese; and oils.
        Milk and yogurt are high in riboflavin. Enriched grains are good sources of riboflavin. Quinoa and some fruits and vegetables contain riboflavin.
    Includes a variety of protein foods such as lean meats; poultry; eggs; seafood; beans, peas, and lentils; nuts and seeds; and soy products.
        Beef is rich in riboflavin. Chicken, fish, nuts, and eggs are good sources of riboflavin.
    Limits foods and beverages higher in added sugars, saturated fat, and sodium.
    Limits alcoholic beverages.
    Stays within your daily calorie needs.

References

    Rivlin RS. Riboflavin. In: Coates PM, Betz JM, Blackman MR, et al., eds. Encyclopedia of Dietary Supplements. 2nd ed. London and New York: Informa Healthcare; 2010:691-9.
    Said HM, Ross AC. Riboflavin. In: Ross AC, Caballero B, Cousins RJ, Tucker KL, Ziegler TR, eds. Modern Nutrition in Health and Disease. 11th ed. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2014:325-30.
    Institute of Medicine. Food and Nutrition Board. Dietary Reference Intakes: Thiamin, Riboflavin, Niacin, Vitamin B6, Folate, Vitamin B12, Pantothenic Acid, Biotin, and Choline. Washington, DC: National Academy Press; 1998.
    McCormick DB. Riboflavin. In: Erdman JW, Macdonald IA, Zeisel SH, eds. Present Knowledge in Nutrition. 10th ed. Washington, DC: Wiley-Blackwell; 2012:280-92.
    Gaylord AM, Warthesen JJ, Smith DE. Influence of milk fat, milk solids, and light intensity on the light stability of vitamin A and riboflavin in lowfat milk. J Dairy Sci 1986;69:2779-84. [PubMed abstract]
    Gibson RS. Assessment of the Status of Thiamin, Riboflavin, and Niacin. In: Principles of Nutritional Assessment. 2nd ed. New York: Oxford University Press; 2005:545-68.
    Hoey L, McNulty H, Strain JJ. Studies of biomarker responses to intervention with riboflavin: a systematic review. Am J Clin Nutr 2009;89:1960S-80S.
    [PubMed abstract]
    McCormick DB. Vitamin/mineral supplements: of questionable benefit for the general population. Nutr Rev 2010;68:207-13. [PubMed abstract]
    Dainty JR, Bullock NR, Hart DJ, Hewson AT, Turner R, Finglas PM, et al. Quantification of the bioavailability of riboflavin from foods by use of stable-isotope labels and kinetic modeling. Am J Clin Nutr 2007;85:1557-64. [PubMed abstract]
    Gregory JF, 3rd. Accounting for differences in the bioactivity and bioavailability of vitamers. Food Nutr Res 2012;56.
    [PubMed abstract]
    Agte V, Tarwadi K, Mengale S, Hinge A, Chiplonkar S. Vitamin profile of cooked foods: how healthy is the practice of ready-to-eat foods? Int J Food Sci Nutr 2002;53:197-208. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service. FoodData Central, 2019.
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Food Labeling: Revision of the Nutrition and Supplement Facts Labels. 2016.
    National Institutes of Health. Dietary Supplement Label Database. 2014.
    Fulgoni VL, 3rd, Keast DR, Bailey RL, Dwyer J. Foods, fortificants, and supplements: where do Americans get their nutrients? J Nutr 2011;141:1847-54. [PubMed abstract]
    Farmer B, Larson BT, Fulgoni VL, 3rd, Rainville AJ, Liepa GU. A vegetarian dietary pattern as a nutrient-dense approach to weight management: an analysis of the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 1999-2004. J Am Diet Assoc 2011;111:819-27. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service. What We Eat in America, 2009-2010. 2012.
    Manore MM. Effect of physical activity on thiamine, riboflavin, and vitamin B-6 requirements. Am J Clin Nutr 2000;72:598S-606S. [PubMed abstract]
    American Dietetic Association, Dietitians of Canada, American College of Sports Medicine, Rodriguez NR, Di Marco NM, Langley S. American College of Sports Medicine position stand. Nutrition and athletic performance. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2009;41:709-31. [PubMed abstract]
    Wacker J, Fruhauf J, Schulz M, Chiwora FM, Volz J, Becker K. Riboflavin deficiency and preeclampsia. Obstet Gynecol 2000;96:38-44. [PubMed abstract]
    Neugebauer J, Zanre Y, Wacker J. Riboflavin supplementation and preeclampsia. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 2006;93:136-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Smedts HP, Rakhshandehroo M, Verkleij-Hagoort AC, de Vries JH, Ottenkamp J, Steegers EA, et al. Maternal intake of fat, riboflavin and nicotinamide and the risk of having offspring with congenital heart defects. Eur J Nutr 2008;47:357-65. [PubMed abstract]
    Suprapto B, Widardo, Suhanantyo. Effect of low-dosage vitamin A and riboflavin on iron-folate supplementation in anaemic pregnant women. Asia Pac J Clin Nutr 2002;11:263-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Badart-Smook A, van Houwelingen AC, Al MD, Kester AD, Hornstra G. Fetal growth is associated positively with maternal intake of riboflavin and negatively with maternal intake of linoleic acid. J Am Diet Assoc 1997;97:867-70. [PubMed abstract]
    Sanchez DJ, Murphy MM, Bosch-Sabater J, Fernandez-Ballart J. Enzymic evaluation of thiamin, riboflavin and pyridoxine status of parturient mothers and their newborn infants in a Mediterranean area of Spain. Eur J Clin Nutr 1999;53:27-38. [PubMed abstract]
    Vujkovic M, Steegers EA, van Meurs J, Yazdanpanah N, van Rooij IA, Uitterlinden AG, et al. The maternal homocysteine pathway is influenced by riboflavin intake and MTHFR polymorphisms without affecting the risk of orofacial clefts in the offspring. Eur J Clin Nutr 2010;64:266-73. [PubMed abstract]
    Allen LH. B Vitamins in Breast Milk: Relative importance of maternal status and intake, and effects on infant status and function. Adv Nutr 2012;3:362-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Sakurai T, Furukawa M, Asoh M, Kanno T, Kojima T, Yonekubo A. Fat-soluble and water-soluble vitamin contents of breast milk from Japanese women. J Nutr Sci Vitaminol 2005;51:239-47. [PubMed abstract]
    Murphy SP, Allen LH. Nutritional importance of animal source foods. J Nutr 2003;133:3932S-5S. [PubMed abstract]
    Nichols EK, Talley LE, Birungi N, McClelland A, Madraa E, Chandia AB, et al. Suspected outbreak of riboflavin deficiency among populations reliant on food assistance: a case study of drought-stricken Karamoja, Uganda, 2009-2010. PloS One 2013;8:e62976. [PubMed abstract]
    Powers HJ, Hill MH, Mushtaq S, Dainty JR, Majsak-Newman G, Williams EA. Correcting a marginal riboflavin deficiency improves hematologic status in young women in the United Kingdom (RIBOFEM). Am J Clin Nutr 2011;93:1274-84. [PubMed abstract]
    Larsson CL, Johansson GK. Dietary intake and nutritional status of young vegans and omnivores in Sweden. Am J Clin Nutr 2002;76:100-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Waldmann A, Koschizke JW, Leitzmann C, Hahn A. Dietary intakes and lifestyle factors of a vegan population in Germany: results from the German Vegan Study. Eur J Clin Nutr 2003;57:947-55. [PubMed abstract]
    Majchrzak D, Singer I, Manner M, Rust P, Genser D, Wagner KH, et al. B-vitamin status and concentrations of homocysteine in Austrian omnivores, vegetarians and vegans. Ann Nutr Metab 2006;50:485-91. [PubMed abstract]
    Whitfield KC, Karakochuk CD, Liu Y, McCann A, Talukder A, Kroeun H, et al. Poor thiamin and riboflavin status is common among women of childbearing age in rural and urban cambodia. J Nutr 2015;145:628-33. [PubMed abstract]
    Bosch AM, Stroek K, Abeling NG, Waterham HR, Ijlst L, Wanders RJ. The Brown-Vialetto-Van Laere and Fazio Londe syndrome revisited: natural history, genetics, treatment and future perspectives. Orphanet J Rare Dis 2012;7:83. [PubMed abstract]
    Jaeger B, Bosch AM. Clinical presentation and outcome of riboflavin transporter deficiency: mini review after five years of experience. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2016;39(4):559-64. [PubMed abstract]
    National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke. NINDS Migraine Information Page. National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, 2014.
    Yorns WR, Jr., Hardison HH. Mitochondrial dysfunction in migraine. Semin Pediatr Neurol 2013;20:188-93. [PubMed abstract]
    Di Lorenzo C, Pierelli F, Coppola G, Grieco GS, Rengo C, Ciccolella M, et al. Mitochondrial DNA haplogroups influence the therapeutic response to riboflavin in migraineurs. Neurology 2009;72:1588-94. [PubMed abstract]
    Schoenen J, Jacquy J, Lenaerts M. Effectiveness of high-dose riboflavin in migraine prophylaxis. A randomized controlled trial. Neurology 1998;50:466-70. [PubMed abstract]
    Condo M, Posar A, Arbizzani A, Parmeggiani A. Riboflavin prophylaxis in pediatric and adolescent migraine. J Headache Pain 2009;10:361-5.
    [PubMed abstract]
    Bruijn J, Duivenvoorden H, Passchier J, Locher H, Dijkstra N, Arts WF. Medium-dose riboflavin as a prophylactic agent in children with migraine: a preliminary placebo-controlled, randomised, double-blind, cross-over trial. Cephalalgia 2010;30:1426-34. [PubMed abstract]
    MacLennan SC, Wade FM, Forrest KM, Ratanayake PD, Fagan E, Antony J. High-dose riboflavin for migraine prophylaxis in children: a double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial. J Child Neurol 2008;23:1300-4. [PubMed abstract]
    Holland S, Silberstein SD, Freitag F, Dodick DW, Argoff C, Ashman E. Evidence-based guideline update: NSAIDs and other complementary treatments for episodic migraine prevention in adults: report of the Quality Standards Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology and the American Headache Society. Neurology 2012;78:1346-53. [PubMed abstract]
    Pringsheim T, Davenport W, Mackie G, Worthington I, Aube M, Christie SN, et al. Canadian Headache Society guideline for migraine prophylaxis. Can J Neurol Sci 2012;39:S1-59. [PubMed abstract]
    Bassett JK, Hodge AM, English DR, Baglietto L, Hopper JL, Giles GG, et al. Dietary intake of B vitamins and methionine and risk of lung cancer. Eur J Clin Nutr 2012;66:182-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Johansson M, Relton C, Ueland PM, Vollset SE, Midttun O, Nygard O, et al. Serum B vitamin levels and risk of lung cancer. JAMA 2010;303:2377-85. [PubMed abstract]
    Kabat GC, Miller AB, Jain M, Rohan TE. Dietary intake of selected B vitamins in relation to risk of major cancers in women. Br J Cancer 2008;99:816-21. [PubMed abstract]
    Zschabitz S, Cheng TY, Neuhouser ML, Zheng Y, Ray RM, Miller JW, et al. B vitamin intakes and incidence of colorectal cancer: results from the Women's Health Initiative Observational Study cohort. Am J Clin Nutr 2013;97:332-43. [PubMed abstract]
    de Vogel S, Dindore V, van Engeland M, Goldbohm RA, van den Brandt PA, Weijenberg MP. Dietary folate, methionine, riboflavin, and vitamin B-6 and risk of sporadic colorectal cancer. J Nutr 2008;138:2372-8. [PubMed abstract]

Disclaimer

This fact sheet by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Office of Dietary Supplements (ODS) provides information that should not take the place of medical advice. We encourage you to talk to your health care providers (doctor, registered dietitian, pharmacist, etc.) about your interest in, questions about, or use of dietary supplements and what may be best for your overall health. Any mention in this publication of a specific product or service, or recommendation from an organization or professional society, does not represent an endorsement by ODS of that product, service, or expert advice.

Updated: May 11, 2022


 Selenium: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals (original version)
Selenium: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals
Table of Contents

    Introduction
    Recommended Intakes
    Sources of Selenium
    Selenium Intakes and Status
    Selenium Deficiency
    Groups at Risk of Selenium Inadequacy
    Selenium and Health
    Health Risks from Excessive Selenium
    Interactions with Medications
    Selenium and Healthful Diets
    References
    Disclaimer

Introduction

Selenium is an essential mineral that is naturally present in many foods and added to others. It is also available as a dietary supplement. Selenium is a constituent of 25 selenoproteins, including thioredoxin reductases, glutathione peroxidases, and selenoprotein P [1]. Selenoproteins play critical roles in thyroid hormone metabolism, DNA synthesis, reproduction, and protection from oxidative damage and infection [2-4].

Soil and ground water contain inorganic forms of selenium (e.g., selenites, selenates) that plants accumulate and convert to organic forms, mostly selenomethionine and selenocysteine and their methylated derivatives. In foods, selenium is present primarily as selenomethionine along with selenocysteine. Dietary selenium is readily absorbed by the body, and absorption is largely not affected by selenium status [4-6].
Assessing selenium status

Plasma and serum selenium concentrations are commonly used to assess selenium status, and concentrations of 8 mcg/dL or higher are usually considered sufficient in healthy people. Hair and nail selenium content can be used to assess long-term selenium intakes over months or years. Two plasma selenoproteins, glutathione peroxidase 3 and selenoprotein P, can be used as functional biomarkers of selenium status, but they can be affected by factors such as inflammation, making them potentially unreliable.

Once selenomethionine and inorganic selenium are absorbed, they are rapidly metabolized to a common intermediate that is used for synthesizing selenocysteine, the form of selenium found in the 25 human selenoproteins. Approximately 28% to 46% of the body's total selenium content is found in skeletal muscle [7]. Selenium homeostasis is maintained primarily by urinary excretion. In cases of higher selenium intake, selenium is also excreted through the lungs and in feces [3,4,6].

The most commonly used measures of selenium status are plasma and serum selenium concentrations [2,4]. Plasma or serum selenium concentrations of 8 micrograms per deciliter (mcg/dL) or higher in healthy people are considered sufficient for selenoprotein synthesis [8]. Concentrations in plasma, serum, and urine reflect recent selenium intake, whereas selenium concentrations in whole blood (including erythrocytes) indicate long-term status. Analyses of hair and nail selenium content are also used to monitor long-term intakes, over months or years [3,4].

The two predominant selenoproteins in plasma are glutathione peroxidase 3 and selenoprotein P, and both can be used as functional biomarkers of selenium status [1,3,9]. However, some experts question the reliability of these two biomarkers to indicate selenium deficiency because plasma selenoprotein concentrations can be affected by inflammation and oxidative stress [4,10]. In addition, research suggests that selenium supplementation does not increase selenoprotein P concentration and glutathione peroxidase activity unless individuals are selenium deficient [3,4,6,9,11,12]. Urinary methylated selenometabolites are not reliable selenium status biomarkers because many people lack the methylation enzymes due to genetic polymorphisms [4].
Recommended Intakes

The Food and Nutrition Board at the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine has established Recommended Dietary Allowances and Adequate Intakes for selenium. These values range from 55 to 70 mcg for adults and from 15 to 70 mcg for infants, children, and adolescents, depending on age and life stage.

Intake recommendations for selenium and other nutrients are provided in the Dietary Reference Intakes (DRIs) developed by the Food and Nutrition Board (FNB) at the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine [13]. DRI is the general term for a set of reference values used for planning and assessing nutrient intakes of healthy people. These values include the following:

    Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA): Average daily level of intake sufficient to meet the nutrient requirements of nearly all (97%–98%) healthy individuals; often used to plan nutritionally adequate diets for individuals
    Adequate Intake (AI): Intake at this level is assumed to ensure nutritional adequacy; established when evidence is insufficient to develop an RDA
    Estimated Average Requirement (EAR): Average daily level of intake estimated to meet the requirements of 50% of healthy individuals; usually used to assess the nutrient intakes of groups of people and to plan nutritionally adequate diets for them; can also be used to assess the nutrient intakes of individuals
    Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL): Maximum daily intake unlikely to cause adverse health effects

Table 1 lists the current RDAs for selenium in mcg. For infants from birth to 12 months, the FNB established AIs for selenium that are equivalent to the mean intake of selenium in healthy, breastfed infants.
Table 1: Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDAs) for Selenium in Micrograms (mcg) [13] Age 	Male 	Female 	Pregnancy 	Lactation
0–6 months 	15 mcg* 	15 mcg* 		
7–12 months 	20 mcg* 	20 mcg* 		
1–3 years 	20 mcg 	20 mcg 		
4–8 years 	30 mcg 	30 mcg 		
9–13 years 	40 mcg 	40 mcg 		
14–18 years 	55 mcg 	55 mcg 	60 mcg 	70 mcg
19–50 years 	55 mcg 	55 mcg 	60 mcg 	70 mcg
51+ years 	55 mcg 	55 mcg 		

*Adequate Intake (AI)
Sources of Selenium
Food

Foods that are high in protein, such as seafood, meat, and poultry, are rich sources of selenium. Brazil nuts contain particularly high amounts of selenium. The selenium concentrations of plant-based foods vary by geographic location because the amount and form of selenium in the soil and other factors can influence the selenium content of these foods.

Because selenium is bound to protein in foods, foods that are high in protein tend to be the best sources of selenium. Brazil nuts, seafood, meat, poultry, and organ meats are the richest food sources of selenium. Other sources include cereals and other grains and dairy products [6]. The amount of selenium in drinking water is not nutritionally significant in most geographic regions [3,13]. The major food sources of selenium in the diets of people in the United States are breads, grains, meat, poultry, seafood, and eggs [14].

The amount of selenium in a given type of plant-based food depends on the amount and form of selenium in the soil and several other factors, such as soil pH and the amount of organic matter in the soil [3,13,15]. As a result, selenium concentrations in plant-based foods vary widely by geographic location [2,15]. For example, according to FoodData Central from the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), Brazil nuts have an average of 544 mcg selenium/ounce, but values from other analyses vary widely [16-18].

The selenium content of soil affects the amount of selenium in the plants that animals eat. However, this does not substantially affect the amount of selenium in animal products because animals maintain predictable tissue concentrations of selenium through homeostatic mechanisms [3,6]. Furthermore, formulated livestock feeds generally contain selenium at consistent levels [19].

Several food sources of selenium are listed in Table 2.
Table 2: Selenium Content of Selected Foods [18] Food 	Micrograms
(mcg) per
serving 	Percent
DV*
Brazil nuts, 1 ounce (6–8 nuts) 	544 	989
Tuna, yellowfin, cooked, 3 ounces 	92 	167
Sardines, canned in oil, drained solids with bone, 3 ounces 	45 	82
Shrimp, cooked, 3 ounces 	42 	76
Pork chop, bone-in, broiled, 3 ounces 	37 	67
Beef steak, bottom round, roasted, 3 ounces 	37 	67
Spaghetti, cooked, 1 cup 	33 	60
Beef liver, pan fried, 3 ounces 	28 	51
Turkey, boneless, roasted, 3 ounces 	26 	47
Ham, roasted, 3 ounces 	24 	44
Cod, Pacific, cooked, 3 ounces 	24 	44
Chicken, light meat, roasted, 3 ounces 	22 	40
Cottage cheese, 1% milkfat, 1 cup 	20 	36
Beef, ground, 25% fat, broiled, 3 ounces 	18 	33
Egg, hard-boiled, 1 large 	15 	27
Baked beans, canned (plain or vegetarian), 1 cup 	13 	24
Oatmeal, regular and quick, unenriched, cooked with water, 1 cup 	13 	24
Mushrooms, portabella, grilled, ½ cup 	13 	24
Rice, brown, long-grain, cooked, 1 cup 	12 	22
Bread, whole-wheat, 1 slice 	8 	15
Yogurt, plain, low fat, 1 cup 	8 	15
Milk, 1% fat, 1 cup 	6 	11
Lentils, boiled, 1 cup 	6 	11
Bread, white, 1 slice 	6 	11
Spinach, frozen, boiled, ½ cup 	5 	9
Spaghetti sauce, marinara, 1 cup 	4 	7
Pistachio nuts, dry roasted, 1 ounce 	3 	5
Corn flakes, 1 cup 	1 	2
Green peas, frozen, boiled, ½ cup 	1 	2
Bananas, sliced, ½ cup 	1 	2
Potato, baked, flesh and skin, 1 potato 	1 	2
Peanut butter, smooth, 2 tablespoons 	1 	2
Peach, yellow, raw, 1 medium 	0 	0
Carrots, raw, ½ cup 	0 	0
Lettuce, iceberg, raw, 1 cup 	0 	0

*DV = Daily Value. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) developed DVs to help consumers compare the nutrient contents of foods and dietary supplements within the context of a total diet. The DV for selenium is 55 mcg for adults and children age 4 years and older [20]. FDA does not require food labels to list selenium content unless selenium has been added to the food. Foods providing 20% or more of the DV are considered to be high sources of a nutrient, but foods providing lower percentages of the DV also contribute to a healthful diet. USDA’s FoodData Central [18] lists the nutrient content of many foods and provides a comprehensive list of foods containing selenium arranged by nutrient content and by food name.
Dietary Supplements

Forms of selenium that are commonly found in dietary supplements include selenomethionine, selenium-enriched yeast, sodium selenite, and sodium selenate. The body is able to absorb up to about 90% of the selenium from these forms.

Selenium is available in multivitamin/mineral supplements, in supplements that contain vitamin E and other ingredients, and as stand-alone supplements. Common forms include selenomethionine, selenium-enriched yeast (grown in a high-selenium medium, predominantly as selenomethionine), sodium selenite, and sodium selenate [21-23]. The doses of selenium in multivitamin/mineral supplements vary, but many contain 55 mcg. The amount of selenium is often higher in supplements with fewer ingredients. For example, supplements that combine selenium with vitamin E or other ingredients generally contain 50 to 200 mcg of selenium. Selenium-only supplements typically contain 100 to 400 mcg [21].

The human body absorbs up to about 90% of selenium from selenomethionine, selenium-enriched yeast, selenite, and selenate [4-6,9,12,24].
Selenium Intakes and Status

While selenium intakes and serum concentrations can vary by region, most people in the United States consume adequate amounts of selenium. However, people who follow a vegetarian or vegan dietary pattern may have lower selenium intakes, and people who smoke tend to have lower selenium status than those who do not, possibly because smoking increases oxidative stress.

Most people in the United States consume adequate amounts of selenium. In addition,17% to 19% of adults take a dietary supplement that contains selenium [25].

According to an analysis of data from the 2017–March 2020 National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES), the average daily selenium intake in people age 2 years and older from foods and beverages is 108 mcg and the average daily intake from foods, beverages, and supplements is 116 mcg [25]. Adult men have higher daily intakes (132 mcg from foods and beverages and 145 mcg from foods, beverages, and supplements) than adult women (94 mcg from foods and beverages and 102 mcg from foods, beverages, and supplements).

Dietary selenium intakes are similar among people who are Black and those who are White. People who follow a vegetarian or vegan dietary pattern may have lower selenium intakes than others [26-28].

According to an analysis of NHANES data from 2011 to 2016, the mean serum selenium concentration in males and females age 8 to 80 years is 12.7 mcg/dL [29]. Research indicates that men have slightly higher serum selenium concentrations than women, and people who are White have higher concentrations than those who are Black [30-33]. Selenium status is lower in people who smoke, possibly because smoking increases oxidative stress [34].

Selenium intakes and serum concentrations in the United States and Canada vary somewhat by region because of differences in the amounts of selenium in soil and in local foods [3,13]. For example, residents of the Midwestern and Western United States have higher concentrations than those living in the South and Northeast [32,35]. However, the extensive transport of food in the United States typically allows people living in low-selenium areas to obtain sufficient amounts of selenium [13].
Selenium Deficiency

On its own, selenium deficiency rarely causes illness. However, in certain populations, selenium deficiency may trigger the development of conditions such as Keshan disease and Kashin-Beck disease. In addition, selenium deficiency may increase the risk of congenital hypothyroidism in infants by exacerbating iodine deficiency.

Selenium deficiency alone rarely causes overt illness, but it produces biochemical changes that might predispose people who experience additional stresses to develop certain illnesses [13,36]. For example, Keshan disease is an endemic cardiomyopathy that was first identified in 1935 in parts of China where the soil is low in selenium. Adults in these areas had average selenium intakes of no more than 10 mcg/day; intakes of at least 20 mcg/day are needed to protect adults from the disease [3,13]. Keshan disease mainly affects women of childbearing age and preschool children. Although prevalence is low today, the disease still exists [3,36,37]. The etiology of Keshan disease remains unknown, but disease incidence fell dramatically following several large intervention trials in the 1970s to 1990s that provided selenium selenite supplements. A 2018 systematic review and meta-analysis of 41 studies found that selenium supplements (doses not indicated) reduce the risk of Keshan disease by 86% [38].

Selenium deficiency is also associated with Kashin-Beck disease, a type of osteoarthritis that commonly presents in childhood and puberty and occurs in certain low-selenium and low-iodine areas of China, Tibet, Siberia, and North Korea [3,13,39,40].

Selenium deficiency could exacerbate iodine deficiency, potentially increasing the risk of congenital hypothyroidism in infants [3,8]. Endemic myxedematous hypothyroidism is a disease that occurs in regions with very low selenium levels, such as Central Africa, and it is thought to develop during gestation or early childhood. Individuals with this condition produce insufficient thyroid hormone and present with very low plasma triiodothyronine (T3) and thyroxine (T4) levels and extremely high thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) levels [3].
Groups at Risk of Selenium Inadequacy

Although selenium deficiency is uncommon in the United States, some groups of people have a higher risk of inadequate intakes. These groups include people who live in selenium-deficient regions, those undergoing kidney dialysis, and those living with HIV.

Selenium deficiency is very rare in the United States and Canada [13]. However, some people, including those living in certain other countries, may obtain insufficient amounts of selenium. The following groups are among those most likely to have inadequate intakes of selenium.
People living in selenium-deficient regions

Selenium intakes in North America, even in low-selenium regions, are well above the RDA [41], likely because most people consume foods that originate from a wide geographic area. However, people in some countries whose diet consists primarily of vegetables grown in low-selenium areas are at risk of deficiency [13]. The lowest selenium intakes in the world are in certain parts of China, where large proportions of the population have a primarily vegetarian diet and soil selenium levels are very low [3]. Average selenium intakes are also low in some European countries, especially among populations that follow vegan diets [4,42]. Although intakes in New Zealand were low in the past, they rose after the country increased its importation of high-selenium wheat [15].
People undergoing kidney dialysis

Selenium concentrations are often significantly lower in patients who are undergoing long-term hemodialysis than in healthy individuals partly because hemodialysis removes some selenium from the blood [43-46]. In addition, hemodialysis patients are at risk of low dietary selenium intakes due to anorexia resulting from uremia and dietary restrictions [44,46,47]. However, whether selenium concentrations are sufficient in hemodialysis patients also depends on individual selenium status. For example, median selenium concentrations were above the 95th percentile of normal (normal reference: median 9.2 mcg/dL) at baseline and remained elevated in a 2-year prospective cohort study of 198 hemodialysis patients in Western Canada [47]. Although selenium supplementation increases blood concentrations in hemodialysis patients, more evidence is needed to determine whether supplements have beneficial clinical effects in these individuals.
People living with HIV

People living with HIV often have low selenium concentrations, possibly due to malabsorption or inadequate selenium intakes [48]. The prevalence of selenium deficiency in people living with HIV varies by country, reflecting the variable selenium content of the soil [49]. Observational studies have found an association between lower selenium concentrations in people with HIV and an increased risk of cardiomyopathy; worsening of disease progression; death; and, in pregnant women, HIV transmission to offspring and early death of offspring [50-54]. However, randomized trials suggest that selenium supplementation has little effect on HIV disease progression or treatment.
Selenium and Health

This section focuses on six diseases and conditions in which selenium might play a role: cancer, cardiovascular disease (CVD), cognitive decline and Alzheimer's disease (AD), HIV infection, male fertility, and thyroid disease.

Cancer

Some epidemiological studies have suggested that people with higher selenium status have a lower risk of several types of cancer, and one randomized controlled trial reported that men who took selenium had a lower risk of prostate cancer over a multi-year follow-up period. However, subsequent randomized controlled trials have found that selenium supplementation does not reduce the risk of prostate cancer or other forms of cancer. More research is needed to characterize the relationship between selenium supplementation and cancer risk.

Because selenium has antioxidant properties and has effects on DNA repair, apoptosis, and the endocrine and immune systems, it has been hypothesized to play a role in the prevention of cancer  [15,55-57]. Results from animal studies also suggest that selenium may have chemopreventive properties [3,6]. Researchers have examined the effects of selenium primarily for prostate, breast, lung, and colorectal cancers, with prostate cancer being the most extensively studied.

Epidemiological studies have suggested an inverse association between selenium status and the risk of colorectal, prostate, lung, bladder, skin, esophageal, and gastric cancers. In addition, a few early clinical trials found that selenium supplements reduced the risk of some forms of cancer, but more recent trials have not supported these findings [58,59].

The Nutritional Prevention of Cancer Trial, which began recruitment in 1983, was a randomized controlled trial that investigated 200 mcg/day selenium as selenium yeast or placebo for a mean of 4.5 years in 1,312 men and women in the United States with histories of nonmelanoma skin cancer [60,61]. Although selenium supplementation did not reduce the recurrence of nonmelanoma skin cancer, a secondary analysis of the trial found that men who took selenium had a 49% lower risk of prostate cancer than those who took placebo over a mean follow-up of about 7.5 years. The effect was strongest among men with the lowest baseline plasma selenium concentrations (below 10.6 mcg/dL), with no effect among men with plasma selenium concentrations greater than 12.3 mcg/dL.

The subsequent Selenium and Vitamin E Cancer Prevention Trial (SELECT), however, did not find that selenium supplementation reduced the risk of prostate cancer. This randomized controlled trial in 35,533 men age 50 years or older from the United States, Canada, and Puerto Rico was discontinued after 5.5 years when analyses showed no association between prostate cancer risk and supplementation with 200 mcg/day selenium as selenomethionine with or without 400 international units (IU)/day vitamin E [62]. An additional 1.5 years of follow-up data on participants after they stopped taking the study supplements confirmed the lack of a significant association between selenium supplementation and prostate cancer risk [63]. Further investigation in a case-cohort of 1,739 men with prostate cancer and 3,117 matched controls from the SELECT trial found that selenium supplementation did not affect prostate cancer risk in men with low baseline selenium status (based on toenail selenium levels) [64]. However, the researchers did find an increased risk of high-grade prostate cancer in men with higher baseline selenium status (≥60th percentile of toenail selenium) and recommended that men over age 55 avoid selenium supplementation at doses that exceed recommended dietary intakes.

A 2018 Cochrane Review on the use of selenium for the prevention of cancer included 83 studies (including the studies described above) [59]. Among the 70 observational cohort studies reviewed, participants with the highest baseline selenium status had a 28% lower cancer risk and a 24% lower cancer mortality than those with the lowest status. In addition, these participants had a 33% lower risk of bladder cancer; an 18% lower risk of lung cancer; an 18% lower risk of colorectal cancer; and, in men, a 16% lower risk of prostate cancer. The authors found no association between selenium status in women and the risk of breast cancer. However, due to major weaknesses in study design, confounders, and limitations in the assessment of selenium exposure, the certainty of evidence for these findings was very low. In addition, no evidence of a dose-response relationship between selenium status and cancer risk was observed.

The 10 randomized, placebo-controlled trials examined in the 2018 Cochrane Review included a total of 27,232 participants, 94% of which were men [59]. Results from these studies showed that supplementing with 200 to 500 mcg/day selenium, primarily as selenomethionine, for 2 to 10.3 years had little to no effect on cancer incidence or mortality. The certainty of evidence was high for prostate, colorectal, lung, and bladder cancers and moderate for breast and nonmelanoma skin cancers. Because most of the studies used 200 mcg/day selenium, the authors concluded that 200 mcg/day selenium does not reduce the overall risk of cancer or the risk of individual cancer types. They also concluded that more research is needed to determine if selenium supplementation might modify cancer risk in individuals with specific genetic backgrounds or nutritional status or if different forms of selenium have different effects [10,59].

Starting in 2003, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) allowed two qualified health claims that some scientific evidence suggests consumption of selenium “may reduce the risk of certain forms of cancer” and “may produce anticarcinogenic effects.” However, FDA determined that this evidence is limited and not conclusive [65]. In 2009, FDA evaluated additional qualified health claims for selenium and denied claims for many forms of cancer but allowed qualified health claims for three forms of cancer, noting that FDA concludes it is “highly uncertain” that selenium supplements reduce the risk of bladder cancer in women or the risk of thyroid cancer, and “highly unlikely” that selenium supplements reduce the risk of prostate cancer [66].

More research is needed to fully understand the relationship between selenium status and cancer risk and to determine whether selenium supplements can help prevent any form of cancer.

Cardiovascular disease

The observational studies that have examined the associations between low selenium status and the risk of cardiovascular disease have produced conflicting results. The available clinical trial evidence does not support using selenium supplementation to reduce the risk of cardiovascular disease, especially in people who obtain sufficient selenium from their diet. However, taking selenium as part of an antioxidant formula may reduce the risk of cardiovascular mortality.

Selenoproteins help reduce inflammation and prevent lipid oxidation and platelet aggregation [67,68]. For these reasons, experts have hypothesized that selenium supplements could reduce the risk of CVD or deaths associated with CVD.

Results from early observational studies suggested that low selenium status might increase the risk of CVD. A 2006 meta-analysis of 25 observational studies that primarily enrolled men over age 40 reported an inverse association between selenium concentrations and the risk of coronary heart disease [69]. Mean serum selenium concentrations ranged from 5.18 to 13.07 mcg/dL; men with the highest selenium concentrations had a 15% lower risk of coronary heart disease than those with the lowest.

Since then, epidemiological studies on the role of selenium in CVD have yielded conflicting findings. A study in 1,042 middle-age White men and women (mean age 40.8 years) reported that higher plasma selenium concentrations (mean 12.4 mcg/dL) were associated with higher total and non-high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol levels [70]. On the other hand, a study in 13,887 adults in the United States showed no association between baseline serum selenium concentrations (mean 12.56 mcg/dL) and cardiovascular mortality over 12 years of follow-up [71]. Similarly, an 18-year prospective study in 3,112 young adult men and women (age 20–32 years at baseline) reported no association between baseline toenail selenium levels and changes in carotid intima-media thickness or coronary artery calcium score at the end of the study [72].

Several clinical trials have examined whether selenium supplementation alone or as part of a multivitamin/mineral supplement reduces the risk of CVD. In one trial, 474 healthy adults age 60 to 74 years with a mean baseline plasma selenium concentration of 9.12 mcg/dL took 100, 200, or 300 mcg/day selenium as selenium yeast or placebo for 6 months [73]. Selenium supplements that provide 100 and 200 mcg/day lowered total plasma cholesterol by an average of 8.5 and 9.7 milligrams (mg)/dL and non-HDL cholesterol by 7.7 and 10.4 mg/dL, respectively, while 300 mcg/day selenium increased HDL levels by 2.3 mg/dL. However, the study authors noted that the clinical significance of these findings is unclear. Other trials have found that supplementation with selenium alone (100, 200, or 300 mcg/day) or supplementation with a multivitamin/mineral product that contained selenium (100 mcg/day) does not reduce the risk of CVD or cardiac death [67,74-76].

The SELECT trial (detailed in the Cancer section, above) assessed cardiovascular risk as a secondary outcome in 17,488 well-nourished men and found that taking 200 mcg/day selenium did not affect the risk of cardiovascular events over 7 to12 years [63]. A Cochrane Review of SELECT and 11 other smaller randomized trials that provided 100 to 800 mcg/day selenium supplementation for 2 weeks to 12 years in a total of 19,715 predominantly male adults also found that selenium supplements did not reduce the risk of fatal and nonfatal cardiovascular events [68]. All studies were assessed as having a low risk of bias.

Although studies suggest that supplementing with selenium does not reduce the risk of CVD, including selenium in antioxidant mixtures may reduce the risk of cardiovascular mortality. A meta-analysis and systematic review included 43 randomized trials in adults who took either selenium supplements alone or as part of antioxidant formulas for at least 24 weeks (antioxidant formulas were defined by the researchers as containing two or more of the following: selenium, retinol, beta-carotene, vitamin C, vitamin E, zinc, or copper) [77]. Selenium alone, providing 100 to 400 mcg/day, or antioxidant formulas with or without 50 to 200 mcg selenium did not affect the risk of CVD or cardiovascular mortality. The researchers also separately compared the effects of antioxidant formulas that contained selenium with those that did not. In this analysis, cardiovascular mortality was reduced by 23% among the participants who took the antioxidant formulas that contained selenium, when compared with those who took formulas that did not.

Overall, clinical trial evidence does not support the use of selenium supplementation for reducing the risk of CVD, particularly in healthy people who obtain sufficient selenium from food. Additional clinical trials are needed to better understand any contributions of selenium from food and dietary supplements to cardiovascular health.

Cognitive decline and Alzheimer’s disease

Researchers are investigating the role of selenium in maintaining cognitive function in older adults, because chronic selenium deficiencies have been linked to cognitive decline. The results from observational studies have been mixed, with some reporting an association between lower plasma selenium concentrations and neurological impairments or a higher risk of Alzheimer’s disease and others finding no such association. The evidence from clinical trials does not support the use of selenium supplementation to reduce the risk of cognitive decline and dementia in older adults.

Selenoproteins have antioxidant and anti-inflammatory activities, and serum selenium concentrations decline with age [78,79]. In addition, chronic selenium deficiencies are correlated with cognitive decline [80,81]. For these reasons, researchers have hypothesized that higher selenium intakes might reduce the risk of cognitive decline.

An analysis of 2011–2014 NHANES data showed that higher whole blood selenium concentrations and higher selenium intakes were associated with higher cognitive scores in older adults [33,82]. However, results from other observational studies have been mixed [83-86]. A study in 1,012 men and women in Italy (mean age 75 years) reported that lower plasma selenium concentrations were associated with subtle neurological impairments [79]. Participants in the lowest quartile of plasma selenium (less than 6.67 mcg/dL) had worse neuro-motor performance than those in the highest quartile (more than 8.23 mcg/dL). In contrast, a study in 154 healthy people in Australia (96% women, average age 71 years), 85% of whom had replete selenium concentrations (average plasma selenium 16.9 mcg/dL), found no association between plasma selenium concentrations and cognitive outcomes [81].

Researchers have evaluated whether taking an antioxidant supplement that contains selenium reduces the risk of cognitive impairment in older adults. A post hoc analysis of the Supplémentation en Vitamines et Minéraux Antioxydants (SU.VI.MAX) study in 4,447 participants age 45 to 60 years in France found that, compared with people who received placebo, people who took a daily supplement that contained 100 mcg selenium with 120 mg ascorbic acid, 30 mg vitamin E, 6 mg beta-carotene, and 20 mg zinc for 8 years had higher episodic memory and semantic fluency test scores 6 years after supplementation ended [87]. However, selenium’s independent contribution to the observed effects in this study cannot be determined.

Observational studies have found that individuals with AD have lower blood selenium concentrations than cognitively healthy older adults [88,89]. The Prevention of Alzheimer’s Disease with Vitamin E and Selenium (PREADVISE) trial was the first large-scale primary prevention trial to study the effects of selenium (200 mcg/day as selenomethionine) and vitamin E (400 IU/day) in 7,540 cognitively healthy men age 60 years and older [90]. However, during the 5.4 years of supplement use, the trial found no difference in the incidence of new AD or dementia among participants who took selenium only, vitamin E only, or selenium plus vitamin E and those who took placebo.

A 2022 systematic review and meta-analysis of 11 clinical trials evaluated the effects of supplements that contained selenium only or selenium plus other nutrients in adults age 69 to 89 years with mild cognitive impairment or AD [91]. Supplements that contained both organic and inorganic forms of selenium were used. These studies showed that administering various doses of supplements that contained selenium plus other nutrients or selenium alone for 12 to 24 weeks did not improve cognitive test scores.

Selenium may play a role in maintaining healthy brain function, but clinical evidence does not support the use of selenium supplementation in replete individuals for reducing the risk of cognitive decline and dementia in older adults.

HIV infection

Although selenium deficiency can increase the risk of morbidity and mortality among people with HIV, selenium supplementation appears to provide limited benefits to this population. Clinical trials in people with HIV have reported that selenium supplementation has little, if any, effect on immune function endpoints, and two Cochrane Reviews concluded that there was insufficient evidence to determine whether selenium supplementation is beneficial in people with HIV. However, some evidence suggests that selenium supplementation may reduce the risk of preterm birth in pregnant women with HIV.

In children and adults with HIV, selenium deficiency is associated with a higher risk of morbidity and mortality [54]. However, studies that have examined whether micronutrient supplementation, including selenium, affects the risk of HIV transmission or disease outcomes in children and adults have had mixed results. An observational study in Thailand did not identify associations between selenium status in children with HIV and treatment outcomes [92]. This study included 141 boys and girls with HIV (median age 7.3 years), 97 of whom started antiretroviral therapy (ART) over a period of 48 weeks. Baseline selenium concentrations (all of which were adequate) showed no associations with ART treatment outcomes.

Clinical trials have found that selenium supplementation has limited benefits for immune function in people with HIV. A clinical trial in Rwanda examined the effects of selenium supplementation on CD4+ T-cell counts in 300 men and women age 21 years and older with HIV [93]. Participants had CD4+ T-cell counts between 400 and 650 cells/microliter (mcL), so they were not yet eligible for ART. Participants took 200 mcg/day selenium or placebo for 24 months. During the trial, average CD4+ T-cell counts declined in both the treatment and placebo groups, but the rate of depletion was 43.8% lower in those who took selenium. However, selenium supplementation had no effect on the composite endpoint of a CD4+ count less than 350 cells/mcL or initiation of ART.

Selenium supplementation provided no benefits in a randomized controlled trial in Iran in which 146 men and women (mean age 38.6 years) who were receiving ART for HIV took 50 mg/day zinc, 200 mcg/day selenium, or placebo for 6 months. The investigators then followed participants for another 3 months but found that selenium supplementation did not raise CD4+ T-cell counts [94].

Two Cochrane Reviews also concluded that selenium supplements offer little, if any, benefit for people with HIV. The first review examined whether micronutrient supplementation reduces the burden of HIV infection in children [95]. It included three clinical trials that administered 30 or 60 mcg/day selenium as part of a multiple-micronutrient formulation in children with HIV who were living in South Africa or Uganda. The authors found that evidence was insufficient to determine whether supplementation with selenium alone is beneficial. Similarly, the authors of a second Cochrane Review of four clinical trials in a total of 1,187 adults with HIV concluded that 200 mcg/day selenium for 9 to 24 months may have little to no effect on CD4+ T-cell count and viral load [96]. They also concluded that the evidence was insufficient to determine whether selenium supplementation affects the risk of hospital admission in adults with HIV.

Researchers have also examined whether blood selenium concentration or selenium supplementation affects pregnancy outcomes in women with HIV. These studies have found associations between low blood selenium concentrations and higher risk of preterm birth, and they suggest that selenium supplementation might reduce the risk of preterm birth. For example, a cross-sectional study in Nigeria of 113 pregnant adolescents and women age 15 to 49 years with HIV found that those with a selenium deficiency (defined as blood selenium <7 mcg/dL) at 14 to 26 weeks of gestation were almost eight times as likely to have a preterm birth as those with normal selenium concentrations [97]. Individuals with a low CD4+ T-cell count also had an eight-fold higher risk of preterm birth. In a clinical trial in Nigeria, researchers examined whether selenium supplementation affected pregnancy outcomes and disease progression in 90 pregnant women with HIV (mean age 29.7 years) at 14 to 27 weeks of gestation [98]. In this trial, participants took 200 mcg/day selenium or placebo between enrollment and delivery. Those who took selenium had a 68% lower risk of preterm birth than those who took placebo, but the risk of low birthweight did not differ between the two groups. In addition, selenium supplementation did not affect the levels of HIV infection markers (CD4+ T-cell counts and viral load).

Overall, the clinical evidence on whether selenium supplementation affects the risk of HIV transmission or disease outcomes is inconclusive, although limited evidence suggests that it might reduce the risk of preterm birth in women with HIV. More research is needed to determine whether selenium supplementation benefits children and adults with HIV.

Male fertility

While some clinical trials have reported improvements in certain aspects of sperm quality among men who received selenium supplements, others have reported no effects. There is currently not enough data to determine whether selenium supplements significantly affect male fertility.

Infertility is considered a global public health issue, affecting about 15% of the world’s population. Observational studies suggest that consuming a healthy diet may improve sperm quality [99]. Certain nutrients, such as selenium, may also play a role, possibly because they reduce oxidative stress that has been linked to male infertility. In addition, the selenoprotein phospholipid hydroperoxide glutathione peroxidase is a major constituent and structural component of mature sperm [100]. A 5-year prospective study in idiopathic infertile men found that both low and high selenium semen concentrations were associated with male infertility and reproductive failures [101,102].

The clinical trials that have evaluated the effects of selenium supplementation on sperm quality have had conflicting findings. A trial in 54 healthy men (nonsmokers) age 18 to 45 years administered 300 mcg/day selenium (as selenium yeast) or placebo for 48 weeks [103]. No differences in sperm concentration or motility were found between the groups, and semen volume declined in both groups.

In contrast, a 3-month trial in Scotland in 69 men (mean age 33 years) with reduced sperm motility and low selenium plasma concentrations (mean 8.1 mcg/dL) found that administering 100 mcg/day selenium as selenomethionine improved plasma selenium concentrations, sperm motility, and the odds of conception compared with placebo. No additional benefits were found when vitamins A, C, and E were included with the selenium supplement [102]. Another 3-month trial that provided 200 mcg/day selenium as selenium yeast or 200 mg/day coenzyme Q10 to 70 men (average age 25 years) with idiopathic infertility reported increases in total and progressive sperm motility in those who toook selenium [104]. However, this trial did not have a placebo group or measure baseline selenium status.

More research is needed to determine whether selenium supplements affect male fertility.

Thyroid disease

Selenium plays important roles in the synthesis and metabolism of thyroid hormones. In women, low selenium status appears to be associated with an increased risk of thyroid disease; this association has not been found in men. Clinical trials have found that selenium supplementation can lower the levels of certain thyroid antibodies in people with chronic autoimmune thyroiditis, but other trials have reported no effect on thyroid function or the quality of life in these patients. The results of the clinical trials that have examined the effects of selenium supplementation on thyroid antibodies in pregnant women have also been mixed, and the American Thyroid Association recommends against selenium supplementation in pregnant women who have thyroid autoimmunity.

Selenium concentration is higher in the thyroid gland than in any other organ in the body, and, like iodine, selenium has important functions in thyroid hormone synthesis and metabolism [105]. For example, selenoproteins play critical roles in the conversion of the prohormone T4 to the active T3. In addition, the selenoproteins glutathione peroxidase and thioredoxin reductase help protect the thyroid gland from the hydrogen peroxide produced during thyroid hormone synthesis [15,105].

Epidemiological studies have found associations between low selenium status and an increased risk of thyroid disease. However, this effect has been observed only in women [23,106,107]. For example, data from 1,900 middle-age men and women with mean serum selenium concentrations of 12.4 mcg/dL showed an inverse association between serum selenium concentrations and thyroid volume and a protective effect of selenium against the risk of goiter in the women participants, but not the men [108]. Similarly, a cross-sectional study in 805 women age 18 to 65 and men age 60 to 65 years in Denmark with mean serum selenium concentrations of 9.7 mcg/dL and mild iodine deficiency found an inverse association between serum selenium concentration and thyroid volume among the women but not the men [107].

A randomized trial administered 100, 200, or 300 mcg/day selenium as selenium yeast for 6 months in 368 healthy men and women age 60 to 74 years with mean baseline plasma selenium concentrations of 9.13 mcg/dL. It reported no effect on thyroid function, even though plasma selenium concentrations increased in all three groups [109].

Chronic autoimmune thyroiditis (AIT), also called Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, affects 1 to 2 percent of the population, particularly middle-age women [110]. Several clinical trials have investigated the effect of selenium supplementation on thyroid antibodies in people with AIT. A systematic review and meta-analysis of 16 trials assessed the effects of selenium supplementation on serum thyroid peroxidase antibody (TPOAb) and thyroglobulin antibody (TgAb) levels in those with AIT who were treated with levothyroxine compared with those who were newly diagnosed and not treated with levothyroxine [111]. The trials included a total 1,494 adults (mainly women) who were administered 80 to 200 mcg/day selenium (as selenomethionine or sodium selenite) for 3 to 12 months and all but two trials were placebo controlled. Five trials reported baseline serum selenium concentrations ranging from 3.7 to 8.5 mcg/dL, indicating deficient to marginal selenium status in many participants; the other trials did not report baseline selenium status. In the levothyroxine-treated groups, selenium supplementation lowered TPOAb levels. In addition, selenomethionine was more effective than sodium selenite at lowering TPOAb, possibly because of higher absorption. In the groups of participants who were newly diagnosed and who were not treated with levothyroxine, selenium supplementation lowered TPOAb and TgAb levels in the 3-month studies but not in the 6- or 12-month studies.

Other trials have evaluated the effects of selenium supplementation on thyroid function and quality of life in adults with AIT. A systematic review included nine controlled trials (all of which were included in the 16-study review described above) in 679 participants who were predominately female (mean age approximately 39–48 years) [110]. Some of the trials also administered levothyroxine, but analyses were limited to the trials that used selenium alone. Results showed that selenium supplementation ranging from 80 to 200 mcg/day as selenomethionine or sodium selenite for 3 to 12 months did not affect TSH levels, thyroid echogenicity (ultrasound, a measure of hypothyroidism), or health-related quality of life. As in the above-mentioned review, participants had deficient to marginal selenium status in seven of the nine trials that reported on status. The authors concluded that the evidence does not support the use of selenium supplementation for AIT.

Up to 50% of pregnant women who are TPOAb or TgAb positive in the first trimester will develop postpartum thyroiditis, and 20% to 40% of these women will develop permanent primary hypothyroidism [23]. However, results have been mixed from the clinical trials that have examined the effects of selenium supplementation in this population. In one trial, 151 pregnant White women age 18 to 36 years who were TPOAb positive with normal thyroid function and marginal selenium status (mean 8.09 mcg/dL) took 200 mcg/day selenium as selenomethionine or placebo from 12.5 weeks of gestation through 12 months postpartum [112]. Of the participants in the selenium group, 28.6% developed postpartum thyroid disorders compared with 48.6% of those in the placebo group. In addition, 11.7% of the participants in the selenium group developed permanent hypothyroidism compared with 20.3% in the placebo group. Another trial provided 83 mcg/day selenium as selenomethionine to 45 pregnant women who were TPOAb and/or TgAb positive. It also reported reductions in these antibodies at 6 months postpartum compared with placebo [113]. However, a trial that provided 60 mcg/day selenium as selenium yeast to TPOAb positive pregnant women who were mild to moderately iodine deficient showed no reduction in TPOAb levels at delivery [114].

In 2017, the American Thyroid Association issued a weak recommendation against the use of selenium supplementation for pregnant women who are TPOAb positive based on moderate quality evidence [115].

Although selenium is involved with normal thyroid function, more research is needed to understand the role of selenium supplements in thyroid disease, particularly by gender and selenium status.
Health Risks from Excessive Selenium

Selenosis is the result of chronically high intakes of selenium. It is most commonly characterized by hair loss and nail brittleness or loss, but other signs and symptoms can include a garlic odor in the breath, a metallic taste in the mouth, skin rash, nausea, diarrhea, fatigue, irritability, and nervous system abnormalities. The Tolerable Upper Intake Level for selenium is 400 mcg for adults, and it ranges from 45 mcg to 400 mcg for infants, children, and adolescents, depending on age.

Chronically high intakes of the organic and inorganic forms of selenium have similar effects [13]. Early indicators of excess intake are a garlic odor in the breath and a metallic taste in the mouth. The most common clinical signs of chronically high selenium intakes, or selenosis, are hair loss and nail brittleness or loss. Other signs and symptoms include skin rash, nausea, diarrhea, fatigue, irritability, and nervous system abnormalities [3,13,62].

As discussed earlier, Brazil nuts contain very high amounts of selenium (68–91 mcg per nut) and could cause selenium toxicity if consumed regularly. Acute selenium toxicity has resulted from the ingestion of misformulated over-the-counter products that contain very large amounts of selenium [8,55]. In 2008, for example, 201 people experienced severe adverse reactions from taking a liquid dietary supplement that contained 200 times the labeled amount of selenium [116]. Acute selenium toxicity can cause severe gastrointestinal and neurological symptoms; acute respiratory distress syndrome; myocardial infarction; hair loss; muscle tenderness; tremors; lightheadedness; facial flushing; kidney failure; cardiac failure; and, in rare cases, death [13,55].

The FNB has established ULs for selenium from food and supplements based on the amounts of selenium that are associated with hair and nail brittleness and loss (see Table 3) [13]. These ULs, however, do not apply to people who are taking selenium under the care of a physician.
Table 3: Tolerable Upper Intake Levels (ULs) for Selenium in Micrograms (mcg) [13] Age 	Male 	Female 	Pregnancy 	Lactation
0–6 months 	45 mcg 	45 mcg 		
7–12 months 	60 mcg 	60 mcg 		
1–3 years 	90 mcg 	90 mcg 		
4–8 years 	150 mcg 	150 mcg 		
9–13 years 	280 mcg 	280 mcg 		
14–18 years 	400 mcg 	400 mcg 	400 mcg 	400 mcg
19–50 years 	400 mcg 	400 mcg 	400 mcg 	400 mcg
51+ years 	400 mcg 	400 mcg 		

In 2023, the Panel on Nutrition, Novel Foods and Food Allergens of the European Food Safety Authority released a scientific opinion on the ULs for selenium [117]. Based on systematic reviews that examined associations between excess selenium intake and clinical effects, specifically alopecia, the panel set an upper limit for selenium of 255 mcg/day for all adults, including women who are pregnant or lactating, with lower amounts ranging from 70 to 230 mcg/day for children and teens, depending on age.
Interactions with Medications

Selenium supplements may interact with medications. In addition, certain medications, such as cisplatin, can affect selenium levels in the body.

Selenium can interact with certain medications, and some medications can have an adverse effect on selenium levels. One example is provided below. Individuals who are taking this and other medications on a regular basis should discuss their selenium status with their health care providers.
Cisplatin

Cisplatin, an inorganic platinum chemotherapy agent, is used to treat ovarian, bladder, lung, and other cancers. Cisplatin can reduce selenium levels in hair and serum but whether these reductions have a clinically significant impact is not known [118,119]. Some small studies have shown that selenium supplementation can reduce cisplatin’s toxicity [120], but the authors of a Cochrane Review concluded that the evidence that selenium supplementation alleviates the side effects of chemotherapy is insufficient [121].
Selenium and Healthful Diets

In general, a person’s nutritional needs should be met primarily through the diet, including fortified foods. Dietary supplements may be useful in cases where it is not possible to meet the needs for specific nutrients through food alone, especially during certain life stages. The Dietary Guidelines for Americans offers a general description of healthy dietary patterns.

The federal government’s 2020–2025 Dietary Guidelines for Americans notes that “Because foods provide an array of nutrients and other components that have benefits for health, nutritional needs should be met primarily through foods.…In some cases, fortified foods and dietary supplements are useful when it is not possible otherwise to meet needs for one or more nutrients (e.g., during specific life stages such as pregnancy).” [122]

For more information about building a healthy dietary pattern, refer to the Dietary Guidelines for Americans and the USDA’s MyPlate.

The Dietary Guidelines for Americans describes a healthy dietary pattern as one that

    Includes a variety of vegetables; fruits; grains (at least half whole grains); fat-free and low-fat milk, yogurt, and cheese; and oils.
        Many whole grains and dairy products, including milk and yogurt, are good sources of selenium. Some ready-to-eat breakfast cereals are fortified with selenium, and some fruits and vegetables contain selenium.
    Includes a variety of protein-rich foods, such as lean meats, poultry, eggs, seafood, beans, peas, lentils, nuts, seeds, and soy products.
        Pork, beef, turkey, chicken, fish, shellfish, and eggs contain high amounts of selenium. Brazil nuts contain particularly high levels of selenium.
    Limits foods and beverages that are higher in added sugars, saturated fat, and sodium.
    Limits alcoholic beverages.
    Stays within your daily calorie needs.

References

    Gladyshev VN, Arnér ES, Berry MJ, Brigelius-Flohé R, Bruford EA, et al. Selenoprotein Gene Nomenclature. J Biol Chem 2016;291:24036-40. [PubMed abstract]
    Sunde RA. Selenium. In: Ross AC, Caballero B, Cousins RJ, Tucker KL, Ziegler TR, eds. Modern Nutrition in Health and Disease. 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2014:225-37.
    Hong LK, Diamond AM. Selenium. In: Marriott BP, Birt DF, Stallings VA, Yates AA, eds. Present Knowledge in Nutrition. 11th ed. Cambridge, MA: Academic Press; 2020:443-56.
    Lei XG, Rayman M, Sunde RA. Selenium. In: Tucker KL, Ross CA, Jensen GL, Torger-Decker R, Duggan CP, eds. Modern Nutrition in Health and Disease. 12th ed. Burlington, MA: Jones & Bartlett Learning. In press. 2024.
    Burk RF, Hill KE. Regulation of Selenium Metabolism and Transport. Annu Rev Nutr 2015;35:109-34. [PubMed abstract]
    Lei XG, Combs GF, Jr., Sunde RA, Caton JS, Arthington JD, et al. Dietary Selenium Across Species. Annu Rev Nutr 2022;42:337-75. [PubMed abstract]
    Terry EN, Diamond AM. Selenium. In: Erdman JW, Macdonald IA, Zeisel SH, eds. Present Knowledge in Nutrition. 10th ed. Washington, D.C.: Wiley-Blackwell; 2012:568-87.
    Sunde RA. Selenium. In: Coates PM, Betz JM, Blackman MR, eds. Encyclopedia of Dietary Supplements. 2nd ed. London and New York: Informa Healthcare; 2010:711-8.
    Burk RF, Norsworthy BK, Hill KE, Motley AK, Byrne DW. Effects of chemical form of selenium on plasma biomarkers in a high-dose human supplementation trial. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2006;15:804-10. [PubMed abstract]
    Vinceti M, Filippini T, Cilloni S, Crespi CM. The Epidemiology of Selenium and Human Cancer. Adv Cancer Res 2017;136:1-48. [PubMed abstract]
    Xia Y, Hill KE, Byrne DW, Xu J, Burk RF. Effectiveness of selenium supplements in a low-selenium area of China. Am J Clin Nutr 2005;81:829-34. [PubMed abstract]
    Marshall JR, Burk RF, Payne Ondracek R, Hill KE, Perloff M, et al. Selenomethionine and methyl selenocysteine: multiple-dose pharmacokinetics in selenium-replete men. Oncotarget 2017;8:26312-22. [PubMed abstract]
    Institute of Medicine. Food and Nutrition Board. Dietary Reference Intakes: Vitamin C, Vitamin E, Selenium, and Carotenoids. Washington, DC: National Academy Press; 2000. [PubMed abstract]
    Chun OK, Floegel A, Chung SJ, Chung CE, Song WO, et al. Estimation of antioxidant intakes from diet and supplements in U.S. adults. J Nutr 2010;140:317-24. [PubMed abstract]
    Rayman MP. Selenium and human health. Lancet 2012;379:1256-68. [PubMed abstract]
    Bodó ET, Stefánka Z, Ipolyi I, Sörös C, Dernovics M, et al. Preparation, homogeneity and stability studies of a candidate LRM for Se speciation. Anal Bioanal Chem 2003;377:32-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Thomson CD, Chisholm A, McLachlan SK, Campbell JM. Brazil nuts: an effective way to improve selenium status. Am J Clin Nutr 2008;87:379-84. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Department of Agriculture. Agricultural Research Service. Food Data Central. 2019.
    Ferrari L, Cattaneo D, Abbate R, Manoni M, Ottoboni M, et al. Advances in selenium supplementation: From selenium-enriched yeast to potential selenium-enriched insects, and selenium nanoparticles. Anim Nutr 2023;14:193-203. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Food Labeling: Revision of the Nutrition and Supplement Facts Panel. 2016.
    Office of Dietary Supplements. National Institutes of Health. Dietary Supplement Label Database. 2024.
    Richie JP, Jr., Das A, Calcagnotto AM, Sinha R, Neidig W, et al. Comparative effects of two different forms of selenium on oxidative stress biomarkers in healthy men: a randomized clinical trial. Cancer Prev Res (Phila) 2014;7:796-804. [PubMed abstract]
    Winther KH, Rayman MP, Bonnema SJ, Hegedüs L. Selenium in thyroid disorders - essential knowledge for clinicians. Nat Rev Endocrinol 2020;16:165-76. [PubMed abstract]
    Di Dato C, Gianfrilli D, Greco E, Astolfi M, Canepari S, et al. Profiling of selenium absorption and accumulation in healthy subjects after prolonged L-selenomethionine supplementation. J Endocrinol Invest 2017;40:1183-90. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Department of Agriculture. Agricultural Research Service. What We Eat in America by Gender and Age, 2017-March 2020 Prepandemic. 2022.
    Klein L, Dawczynski C, Schwarz M, Maares M, Kipp K, et al. Selenium, Zinc, and Copper Status of Vegetarians and Vegans in Comparison to Omnivores in the Nutritional Evaluation (NuEva) Study. Nutrients 2023;15:3538. [PubMed abstract]
    Weder S, Zerback EH, Wagener SM, Koeder C, Fischer M, et al. How Does Selenium Intake Differ among Children (1-3 Years) on Vegetarian, Vegan, and Omnivorous Diets? Results of the VeChi Diet Study. Nutrients 2022;15:34. [PubMed abstract]
    Bakaloudi DR, Halloran A, Rippin HL, Oikonomidou AC, Dardavesis TI, et al. Intake and adequacy of the vegan diet. A systematic review of the evidence. Clin Nutr 2021;40:3503-21. [PubMed abstract]
    Bastola MM, Locatis C, Maisiak R, Fontelo P. Selenium, copper, zinc and hypertension: an analysis of the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (2011-2016). BMC Cardiovasc Disord 2020;20:45. [PubMed abstract]
    Laclaustra M, Stranges S, Navas-Acien A, Ordovas JM, Guallar E. Serum selenium and serum lipids in US adults: National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) 2003-2004. Atherosclerosis 2010;210:643-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Xun P, Bujnowski D, Liu K, Morris JS, Guo Z, et al. Distribution of toenail selenium levels in young adult Caucasians and African Americans in the United States: the CARDIA Trace Element Study. Environ Res 2011;111:514-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Niskar AS, Paschal DC, Kieszak SM, Flegal KM, Bowman B, et al. Serum selenium levels in the US population: Third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, 1988-1994. Biol Trace Elem Res 2003;91:1-10. [PubMed abstract]
    Yan X, Liu K, Sun X, Qin S, Wu M, et al. A cross-sectional study of blood selenium concentration and cognitive function in elderly Americans: National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 2011-2014. Ann Hum Biol 2020;47:610-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Thomson CD. Assessment of requirements for selenium and adequacy of selenium status: a review. Eur J Clin Nutr 2004;58:391-402. [PubMed abstract]
    Kafai MR, Ganji V. Sex, age, geographical location, smoking, and alcohol consumption influence serum selenium concentrations in the USA: third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, 1988-1994. J Trace Elem Med Biol 2003;17:13-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Haggerty PA. Medical Nutrition Therapy for Infectious Diseases. In: Raymond JL, Morrow K, eds. Krause and Mahan's Food and the Nutrition Care Process. 16th ed: Elsevier; 2022.
    Chen J. An original discovery: selenium deficiency and Keshan disease (an endemic heart disease). Asia Pac J Clin Nutr 2012;21:320-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Zhou H, Wang T, Li Q, Li D. Prevention of Keshan Disease by Selenium Supplementation: a Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. Biol Trace Elem Res 2018;186:98-105. [PubMed abstract]
    Jirong Y, Huiyun P, Zhongzhe Y, Birong D, Weimin L, et al. Sodium selenite for treatment of Kashin-Beck disease in children: a systematic review of randomised controlled trials. Osteoarthritis Cartilage 2012;20:605-13. [PubMed abstract]
    Rayman MP. Food-chain selenium and human health: emphasis on intake. Br J Nutr 2008;100:254-68. [PubMed abstract]
    Han S, Wu L, Wang W, Li N, Wu X. Trends in Dietary Nutrients by Demographic Characteristics and BMI among US Adults, 2003-2016. Nutrients 2019;11:2617. [PubMed abstract]
    World Health Organization, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. Vitamin and Mineral Requirements in Human Nutrition. 2004.
    Gómez de Oña C, Martínez-Morillo E, Gago González E, Vidau Argüelles P, Fernández Merayo C, et al. Variation of trace element concentrations in patients undergoing hemodialysis in the north of Spain. Scand J Clin Lab Invest 2016;76:492-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Azevedo R, Gennaro D, Duro M, Pinto E, Almeida A. Further Evidence on Trace Element Imbalances in Haemodialysis Patients-Paired Analysis of Blood and Serum Samples. Nutrients 2023;15:1912. [PubMed abstract]
    Almeida A, Gajewska K, Duro M, Costa F, Pinto E. Trace element imbalances in patients undergoing chronic hemodialysis therapy - Report of an observational study in a cohort of Portuguese patients. J Trace Elem Med Biol 2020;62:126580. [PubMed abstract]
    Tonelli M, Wiebe N, Hemmelgarn B, Klarenbach S, Field C, et al. Trace elements in hemodialysis patients: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BMC Med 2009;7:25. [PubMed abstract]
    Tonelli M, Wiebe N, Bello A, Field CJ, Gill JS, et al. Concentrations of Trace Elements in Hemodialysis Patients: A Prospective Cohort Study. Am J Kidney Dis 2017;70:696-704. [PubMed abstract]
    Stone CA, Kawai K, Kupka R, Fawzi WW. Role of selenium in HIV infection. Nutr Rev 2010;68:671-81. [PubMed abstract]
    Shivakoti R, Gupte N, Yang WT, Mwelase N, Kanyama C, et al. Pre-antiretroviral therapy serum selenium concentrations predict WHO stages 3, 4 or death but not virologic failure post-antiretroviral therapy. Nutrients 2014;6:5061-78. [PubMed abstract]
    Campa A, Shor-Posner G, Indacochea F, Zhang G, Lai H, et al. Mortality risk in selenium-deficient HIV-positive children. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr Hum Retrovirol 1999;20:508-13. [PubMed abstract]
    Kupka R, Msamanga GI, Spiegelman D, Rifai N, Hunter DJ, et al. Selenium levels in relation to morbidity and mortality among children born to HIV-infected mothers. Eur J Clin Nutr 2005;59:1250-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Kupka R, Garland M, Msamanga G, Spiegelman D, Hunter D, et al. Selenium status, pregnancy outcomes, and mother-to-child transmission of HIV-1. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr 2005;39:203-10. [PubMed abstract]
    Golin A, Tinkov AA, Aschner M, Farina M, da Rocha JBT. Relationship between selenium status, selenoproteins and COVID-19 and other inflammatory diseases: A critical review. J Trace Elem Med Biol 2023;75:127099. [PubMed abstract]
    Martinez SS, Huang Y, Acuna L, Laverde E, Trujillo D, et al. Role of Selenium in Viral Infections with a Major Focus on SARS-CoV-2. Int J Mol Sci 2021;23. [PubMed abstract]
    Sunde RA. Selenium. In: Bowman B, Russell R, , eds. Present Knowledge in Nutrition. 9th ed. Washington, D.C.: International Life Sciences Institute; 2006:480-97.
    Allen NE, Appleby PN, Roddam AW, Tjønneland A, Johnsen NF, et al. Plasma selenium concentration and prostate cancer risk: results from the European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC). Am J Clin Nutr 2008;88:1567-75. [PubMed abstract]
    Combs GF, Gray WP. Chemopreventive Agents: Selenium. Pharmacology & Therapeutics 1998;79:179-92. [PubMed abstract]
    Dennert G, Zwahlen M, Brinkman M, Vinceti M, Zeegers MP, et al. Selenium for preventing cancer. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2011:Cd005195. [PubMed abstract]
    Vinceti M, Filippini T, Del Giovane C, Dennert G, Zwahlen M, et al. Selenium for preventing cancer. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2018;1:Cd005195. [PubMed abstract]
    Duffield-Lillico AJ, Dalkin BL, Reid ME, Turnbull BW, Slate EH, et al. Selenium supplementation, baseline plasma selenium status and incidence of prostate cancer: an analysis of the complete treatment period of the Nutritional Prevention of Cancer Trial. BJU Int 2003;91:608-12. [PubMed abstract]
    Clark LC, Combs GF, Jr., Turnbull BW, Slate EH, Chalker DK, et al. Effects of selenium supplementation for cancer prevention in patients with carcinoma of the skin. A randomized controlled trial. Nutritional Prevention of Cancer Study Group. JAMA 1996;276:1957-63. [PubMed abstract]
    Lippman SM, Klein EA, Goodman PJ, Lucia MS, Thompson IM, et al. Effect of selenium and vitamin E on risk of prostate cancer and other cancers: the Selenium and Vitamin E Cancer Prevention Trial (SELECT). JAMA 2009;301:39-51. [PubMed abstract]
    Klein EA, Thompson IM, Jr., Tangen CM, Crowley JJ, Lucia MS, et al. Vitamin E and the risk of prostate cancer: the Selenium and Vitamin E Cancer Prevention Trial (SELECT). JAMA 2011;306:1549-56. [PubMed abstract]
    Kristal AR, Darke AK, Morris JS, Tangen CM, Goodman PJ, et al. Baseline selenium status and effects of selenium and vitamin e supplementation on prostate cancer risk. J Natl Cancer Inst 2014;106:djt456. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Qualified Health Claim: Final Decision Letter on Selenium and Certain Cancers (Docket No. 02P-0457). 2003.
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Selenium and a Reduced Risk of Site-specific Cancers, FDA-2008-Q-0323. 2009.
    Cold F, Winther KH, Pastor-Barriuso R, Rayman MP, Guallar E, et al. Randomised controlled trial of the effect of long-term selenium supplementation on plasma cholesterol in an elderly Danish population. Br J Nutr 2015;114:1807-18. [PubMed abstract]
    Rees K, Hartley L, Day C, Flowers N, Clarke A, et al. Selenium supplementation for the primary prevention of cardiovascular disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2013;2013:Cd009671. [PubMed abstract]
    Flores-Mateo G, Navas-Acien A, Pastor-Barriuso R, Guallar E. Selenium and coronary heart disease: a meta-analysis. Am J Clin Nutr 2006;84:762-73. [PubMed abstract]
    Stranges S, Laclaustra M, Ji C, Cappuccio FP, Navas-Acien A, et al. Higher selenium status is associated with adverse blood lipid profile in British adults. J Nutr 2010;140:81-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Bleys J, Navas-Acien A, Guallar E. Serum selenium levels and all-cause, cancer, and cardiovascular mortality among US adults. Arch Intern Med 2008;168:404-10. [PubMed abstract]
    Xun P, Liu K, Morris JS, Daviglus ML, He K. Longitudinal association between toenail selenium levels and measures of subclinical atherosclerosis: the CARDIA trace element study. Atherosclerosis 2010;210:662-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Rayman MP, Stranges S, Griffin BA, Pastor-Barriuso R, Guallar E. Effect of supplementation with high-selenium yeast on plasma lipids: a randomized trial. Ann Intern Med 2011;154:656-65. [PubMed abstract]
    Hercberg S, Galan P, Preziosi P, Bertrais S, Mennen L, et al. The SU.VI.MAX Study: a randomized, placebo-controlled trial of the health effects of antioxidant vitamins and minerals. Arch Intern Med 2004;164:2335-42. [PubMed abstract]
    Hercberg S, Kesse-Guyot E, Druesne-Pecollo N, Touvier M, Favier A, et al. Incidence of cancers, ischemic cardiovascular diseases and mortality during 5-year follow-up after stopping antioxidant vitamins and minerals supplements: a postintervention follow-up in the SU.VI.MAX Study. Int J Cancer 2010;127:1875-81. [PubMed abstract]
    Stranges S, Marshall JR, Trevisan M, Natarajan R, Donahue RP, et al. Effects of selenium supplementation on cardiovascular disease incidence and mortality: secondary analyses in a randomized clinical trial. Am J Epidemiol 2006;163:694-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Jenkins DJA, Kitts D, Giovannucci EL, Sahye-Pudaruth S, Paquette M, et al. Selenium, antioxidants, cardiovascular disease, and all-cause mortality: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Am J Clin Nutr 2020;112:1642-52. [PubMed abstract]
    Savarino L, Granchi D, Ciapetti G, Cenni E, Ravaglia G, et al. Serum concentrations of zinc and selenium in elderly people: results in healthy nonagenarians/centenarians. Exp Gerontol 2001;36:327-39. [PubMed abstract]
    Shahar A, Patel KV, Semba RD, Bandinelli S, Shahar DR, et al. Plasma selenium is positively related to performance in neurological tasks assessing coordination and motor speed. Mov Disord 2010;25:1909-15. [PubMed abstract]
    Cardoso BR, Roberts BR, Bush AI, Hare DJ. Selenium, selenoproteins and neurodegenerative diseases. Metallomics 2015;7:1213-28. [PubMed abstract]
    Cardoso BR, Szymlek-Gay EA, Roberts BR, Formica M, Gianoudis J, et al. Selenium Status Is Not Associated with Cognitive Performance: A Cross-Sectional Study in 154 Older Australian Adults. Nutrients 2018;10:1847. [PubMed abstract]
    Ferdous KA, Knol LL, Park HA. Association between selenium intake and cognitive function among older adults in the US: National Health and Nutrition Examination Surveys 2011-2014. J Nutr Sci 2023;12:e57. [PubMed abstract]
    Loef M, Schrauzer GN, Walach H. Selenium and Alzheimer's disease: a systematic review. J Alzheimers Dis 2011;26:81-104. [PubMed abstract]
    Akbaraly TN, Hininger-Favier I, Carrière I, Arnaud J, Gourlet V, et al. Plasma selenium over time and cognitive decline in the elderly. Epidemiology 2007;18:52-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Berr C, Balansard B, Arnaud J, Roussel AM, Alpérovitch A. Cognitive decline is associated with systemic oxidative stress: the EVA study. Etude du Vieillissement Artériel. J Am Geriatr Soc 2000;48:1285-91. [PubMed abstract]
    Gao S, Jin Y, Hall KS, Liang C, Unverzagt FW, et al. Selenium level and cognitive function in rural elderly Chinese. Am J Epidemiol 2007;165:955-65. [PubMed abstract]
    Kesse-Guyot E, Fezeu L, Jeandel C, Ferry M, Andreeva V, et al. French adults' cognitive performance after daily supplementation with antioxidant vitamins and minerals at nutritional doses: a post hoc analysis of the Supplementation in Vitamins and Mineral Antioxidants (SU.VI.MAX) trial. Am J Clin Nutr 2011;94:892-9. [PubMed abstract]
    de Wilde MC, Vellas B, Girault E, Yavuz AC, Sijben JW. Lower brain and blood nutrient status in Alzheimer's disease: Results from meta-analyses. Alzheimers Dement (N Y) 2017;3:416-31. [PubMed abstract]
    Reddy VS, Bukke S, Dutt N, Rana P, Pandey AK. A systematic review and meta-analysis of the circulatory, erythrocellular and CSF selenium levels in Alzheimer's disease: A metal meta-analysis (AMMA study-I). J Trace Elem Med Biol 2017;42:68-75. [PubMed abstract]
    Kryscio RJ, Abner EL, Caban-Holt A, Lovell M, Goodman P, et al. Association of Antioxidant Supplement Use and Dementia in the Prevention of Alzheimer's Disease by Vitamin E and Selenium Trial (PREADViSE). JAMA Neurol 2017;74:567-73. [PubMed abstract]
    Pereira ME, Souza JV, Galiciolli MEA, Sare F, Vieira GS, et al. Effects of Selenium Supplementation in Patients with Mild Cognitive Impairment or Alzheimer's Disease: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Nutrients 2022;14:3205. [PubMed abstract]
    Bunupuradah T, Ubolyam S, Hansudewechakul R, Kosalaraksa P, Ngampiyaskul C, et al. Correlation of selenium and zinc levels to antiretroviral treatment outcomes in Thai HIV-infected children without severe HIV symptoms. European Journal of Clinical Nutrition 2012;66:900-5. [PubMed abstract]
    Kamwesiga J, Mutabazi V, Kayumba J, Tayari JC, Uwimbabazi JC, et al. Effect of selenium supplementation on CD4+ T-cell recovery, viral suppression and morbidity of HIV-infected patients in Rwanda: a randomized controlled trial. AIDS 2015;29:1045-52. [PubMed abstract]
    Hadadi A, Ostovar A, Edalat Noor B, Rasoolinejad M, Haji Abdolbaghi M, et al. The effect of selenium and zinc on CD4(+) count and opportunistic infections in HIV/AIDS patients: a randomized double blind trial. Acta Clin Belg 2020;75:170-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Irlam JH, Siegfried N, Visser ME, Rollins NC. Micronutrient supplementation for children with HIV infection. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2013:Cd010666. [PubMed abstract]
    Visser ME, Durao S, Sinclair D, Irlam JH, Siegfried N. Micronutrient supplementation in adults with HIV infection. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2017;5:Cd003650. [PubMed abstract]
    Okunade KS, Olowoselu OF, Osanyin GE, John-Olabode S, Akanmu SA, et al. Selenium deficiency and pregnancy outcome in pregnant women with HIV in Lagos, Nigeria. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 2018;142:207-13. [PubMed abstract]
    Okunade KS, Olowoselu OF, John-Olabode S, Hassan BO, Akinsola OJ, et al. Effects of selenium supplementation on pregnancy outcomes and disease progression in HIV-infected pregnant women in Lagos: A randomized controlled trial. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 2021;153:533-41. [PubMed abstract]
    Salas-Huetos A, Rosique-Esteban N, Becerra-Tomás N, Vizmanos B, Bulló M, et al. The Effect of Nutrients and Dietary Supplements on Sperm Quality Parameters: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Randomized Clinical Trials. Adv Nutr 2018;9:833-48. [PubMed abstract]
    Ursini F, Heim S, Kiess M, Maiorino M, Roveri A, et al. Dual function of the selenoprotein PHGPx during sperm maturation. Science 1999;285:1393-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Bleau G, Lemarbre J, Faucher G, Roberts KD, Chapdelaine A. Semen selenium and human fertility. Fertil Steril 1984;42:890-4. [PubMed abstract]
    Scott R, MacPherson A, Yates RW, Hussain B, Dixon J. The effect of oral selenium supplementation on human sperm motility. Br J Urol 1998;82:76-80. [PubMed abstract]
    Hawkes WC, Alkan Z, Wong K. Selenium supplementation does not affect testicular selenium status or semen quality in North American men. J Androl 2009;30:525-33. [PubMed abstract]
    Alahmar AT, Sengupta P. Impact of Coenzyme Q10 and Selenium on Seminal Fluid Parameters and Antioxidant Status in Men with Idiopathic Infertility. Biol Trace Elem Res 2021;199:1246-52. [PubMed abstract]
    Ventura M, Melo M, Carrilho F. Selenium and Thyroid Disease: From Pathophysiology to Treatment. Int J Endocrinol 2017;2017:1297658. [PubMed abstract]
    Wu Q, Rayman MP, Lv H, Schomburg L, Cui B, et al. Low Population Selenium Status Is Associated With Increased Prevalence of Thyroid Disease. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2015;100:4037-47. [PubMed abstract]
    Rasmussen LB, Schomburg L, Köhrle J, Pedersen IB, Hollenbach B, et al. Selenium status, thyroid volume, and multiple nodule formation in an area with mild iodine deficiency. Eur J Endocrinol 2011;164:585-90. [PubMed abstract]
    Derumeaux H, Valeix P, Castetbon K, Bensimon M, Boutron-Ruault MC, et al. Association of selenium with thyroid volume and echostructure in 35- to 60-year-old French adults. Eur J Endocrinol 2003;148:309-15. [PubMed abstract]
    Rayman MP, Thompson AJ, Bekaert B, Catterick J, Galassini R, et al. Randomized controlled trial of the effect of selenium supplementation on thyroid function in the elderly in the United Kingdom. Am J Clin Nutr 2008;87:370-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Winther KH, Wichman JE, Bonnema SJ, Hegedüs L. Insufficient documentation for clinical efficacy of selenium supplementation in chronic autoimmune thyroiditis, based on a systematic review and meta-analysis. Endocrine 2017;55:376-85. [PubMed abstract]
    Wichman J, Winther KH, Bonnema SJ, Hegedüs L. Selenium Supplementation Significantly Reduces Thyroid Autoantibody Levels in Patients with Chronic Autoimmune Thyroiditis: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Thyroid 2016;26:1681-92. [PubMed abstract]
    Negro R, Greco G, Mangieri T, Pezzarossa A, Dazzi D, et al. The influence of selenium supplementation on postpartum thyroid status in pregnant women with thyroid peroxidase autoantibodies. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2007;92:1263-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Mantovani G, Isidori AM, Moretti C, Di Dato C, Greco E, et al. Selenium supplementation in the management of thyroid autoimmunity during pregnancy: results of the "SERENA study", a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Endocrine 2019;66:542-50. [PubMed abstract]
    Mao J, Pop VJ, Bath SC, Vader HL, Redman CW, et al. Effect of low-dose selenium on thyroid autoimmunity and thyroid function in UK pregnant women with mild-to-moderate iodine deficiency. Eur J Nutr 2016;55:55-61. [PubMed abstract]
    Alexander EK, Pearce EN, Brent GA, Brown RS, Chen H, et al. 2017 Guidelines of the American Thyroid Association for the Diagnosis and Management of Thyroid Disease During Pregnancy and the Postpartum. Thyroid 2017;27:315-89. [PubMed abstract]
    MacFarquhar JK, Broussard DL, Melstrom P, Hutchinson R, Wolkin A, et al. Acute selenium toxicity associated with a dietary supplement. Arch Intern Med 2010;170:256-61. [PubMed abstract]
    Turck D, Bohn T, Castenmiller J, de Henauw S, Hirsch-Ernst KI, et al. Scientific opinion on the tolerable upper intake level for selenium. EFSA J 2023;21:e07704.
    Sieja K, Talerczyk M. Selenium as an element in the treatment of ovarian cancer in women receiving chemotherapy. Gynecol Oncol 2004;93:320-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Vernie LN, de Goeij JJ, Zegers C, de Vries M, Baldew GS, et al. Cisplatin-induced changes of selenium levels and glutathione peroxidase activities in blood of testis tumor patients. Cancer Lett 1988;40:83-91. [PubMed abstract]
    Hu YJ, Chen Y, Zhang YQ, Zhou MZ, Song XM, et al. The protective role of selenium on the toxicity of cisplatin-contained chemotherapy regimen in cancer patients. Biol Trace Elem Res 1997;56:331-41. [PubMed abstract]
    Dennert G, Horneber M. Selenium for alleviating the side effects of chemotherapy, radiotherapy and surgery in cancer patients. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2006;2006:Cd005037. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Department of Agriculture and U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Dietary Guidelines for Americans, 2020-2025. 2020.

Disclaimer

This fact sheet by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Office of Dietary Supplements (ODS) provides information that should not take the place of medical advice. We encourage you to talk to your health care providers (doctor, registered dietitian, pharmacist, etc.) about your interest in, questions about, or use of dietary supplements and what may be best for your overall health. Any mention in this publication of a specific product or service, or recommendation from an organization or professional society, does not represent an endorsement by ODS of that product, service, or expert advice.

Updated: September 4, 2025


 Thiamin: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals (original version)
Thiamin: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals
Table of Contents

    Introduction
    Recommended Intakes
    Sources of Thiamin
    Thiamin Intakes and Status
    Thiamin Deficiency
    Groups at Risk of Thiamin Inadequacy
    Thiamin and Health
    Health Risks from Excessive Thiamin
    Interactions with Medications
    Thiamin and Healthful Diets
    References
    Disclaimer

Introduction

Thiamin (or thiamine) is one of the water-soluble B vitamins. It is also known as vitamin B1. Thiamin is naturally present in some foods, added to some food products, and available as a dietary supplement. This vitamin plays a critical role in energy metabolism and, therefore, in the growth, development, and function of cells [1].

Ingested thiamin from food and dietary supplements is absorbed by the small intestine through active transport at nutritional doses and by passive diffusion at pharmacologic doses [1]. Most dietary thiamin is in phosphorylated forms, and intestinal phosphatases hydrolyze them to free thiamin before the vitamin is absorbed [1]. The remaining dietary thiamin is in free (absorbable) form [1,2]. Humans store thiamin primarily in the liver but in very small amounts [3]. The vitamin has a short half-life, so people require a continuous supply of it from the diet.

About 80% of the approximately 25–30 mg of thiamin in the adult human body is in the form of thiamin diphosphate (TDP; also known as thiamin pyrophosphate), the main metabolically active form of thiamin. Bacteria in the large intestine also synthesize free thiamin and TDP, but their contribution, if any, to thiamin nutrition is currently unknown [4]. TDP serves as an essential cofactor for five enzymes involved in glucose, amino acid, and lipid metabolism [1,3].

Levels of thiamin in the blood are not reliable indicators of thiamin status. Thiamin status is often measured indirectly by assaying the activity of the transketolase enzyme, which depends on TDP, in erythrocyte hemolysates in the presence and absence of added TDP [3]. The result, known as the TDP effect, reflects the extent of unsaturation of transketolase with TDP. The result is typically 0%–15% in healthy people, 15%–25% in those with marginal deficiency, and higher than 25% in people with deficiency. Another commonly used measure of thiamin status is urinary thiamin excretion, which provides data on dietary intakes but not tissue stores [5]. For adults, excretion of less than 100 mcg/day thiamin in urine suggests insufficient thiamin intake, and less than 40 mcg/day indicates an extremely low intake [6].
Recommended Intakes

Intake recommendations for thiamin and other nutrients are provided in the Dietary Reference Intakes (DRIs) developed by the Food and Nutrition Board (FNB) at the Institute of Medicine of the National Academies (formerly National Academy of Sciences) [7]. DRI is the general term for a set of reference values used for planning and assessing nutrient intakes of healthy people. These values, which vary by age and sex, include the following:

    Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA): Average daily level of intake sufficient to meet the nutrient requirements of nearly all (97%–98%) healthy individuals; often used to plan nutritionally adequate diets for individuals
    Adequate Intake (AI): Intake at this level is assumed to ensure nutritional adequacy; established when evidence is insufficient to develop an RDA
    Estimated Average Requirement (EAR): Average daily level of intake estimated to meet the requirements of 50% of healthy individuals; usually used to assess the nutrient intakes of groups of people and to plan nutritionally adequate diets for them; can also be used to assess the nutrient intakes of individuals
    Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL): Maximum daily intake unlikely to cause adverse health effects

Table 1 lists the current RDAs for thiamin [7]. For infants from birth to 12 months, the FNB established an AI for thiamin that is equivalent to the mean intake of thiamin in healthy, breastfed infants.
Table 1: Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDAs) for Thiamin [7] Age 	Male 	Female 	Pregnancy 	Lactation
Birth to 6 months* 	0.2 mg 	0.2 mg 		
7–12 months* 	0.3 mg 	0.3 mg 		
1–3 years 	0.5 mg 	0.5 mg 		
4–8 years 	0.6 mg 	0.6 mg 		
9–13 years 	0.9 mg 	0.9 mg 		
14–18 years 	1.2 mg 	1.0 mg 	1.4 mg 	1.4 mg
19–50 years 	1.2 mg 	1.1 mg 	1.4 mg 	1.4 mg
51+ years 	1.2 mg 	1.1 mg 		

*AI
Sources of Thiamin
Food

Food sources of thiamin include whole grains, meat, and fish [2]. Breads, cereals, and infant formulas in the United States and many other countries are fortified with thiamin [2].The most common sources of thiamin in the U.S. diet are cereals and bread [8]. Pork is another major source of the vitamin. Dairy products and most fruits contain little thiamin [3]. About half of the thiamin in the U.S. diet comes from foods that naturally contain thiamin; the remainder comes from foods to which thiamin has been added [9].

Heating foods containing thiamin can reduce their thiamin content. For example, bread has 20%–30% less thiamin than its raw ingredients, and pasteurization reduces thiamin content (which is very small to begin with) in milk by up to 20% [3]. Because thiamin dissolves in water, a significant amount of the vitamin is lost when cooking water is thrown out [3]. Processing also alters thiamin levels in foods; for example, unless white rice is enriched with thiamin, it has one-tenth the amount of thiamin in unenriched brown rice [10].

Data on the bioavailability of thiamin from food are very limited [7]. Some studies do show, however, that thiamin absorption increases when intakes are low [1].

Several food sources of thiamin are listed in Table 2.
Table 2: Thiamin Content of Selected Foods [10] Food 	Milligrams
(mg) per
serving 	Percent
DV*
Breakfast cereals, fortified with 100% of the DV for thiamin, 1 serving 	1.2 	100
Egg noodles, enriched, cooked, 1 cup 	0.5 	42
Pork chop, bone in, broiled, 3 ounces 	0.4 	33
Trout, cooked, dry heat, 3 ounces 	0.4 	33
Black beans, boiled, ½ cup 	0.4 	33
English muffin, plain, enriched, 1 	0.3 	25
Mussels, blue, cooked, moist heat, 3 ounces 	0.3 	25
Tuna, bluefin, cooked, dry heat, 3 ounces 	0.2 	17
Macaroni, whole wheat, cooked, 1 cup 	0.2 	17
Acorn squash, cubed, baked, ½ cup 	0.2 	17
Rice, brown, long grain, not enriched, cooked, ½ cup 	0.2 	17
Rice, white, long grain, enriched, cooked, ½ cup 	0.1 	8
Bread, whole wheat, 1 slice 	0.1 	8
Orange juice, prepared from concentrate, 1 cup 	0.1 	8
Sunflower seeds, toasted, 1 ounce 	0.1 	8
Beef steak, bottom round, trimmed of fat, braised, 3 ounces 	0.1 	8
Yogurt, plain, low fat, 1 cup 	0.1 	8
Oatmeal, regular and quick, unenriched, cooked with water, ½ cup 	0.1 	8
Corn, yellow, boiled, 1 medium ear 	0.1 	8
Milk, 2%, 1 cup 	0.1 	8
Barley, pearled, cooked, 1 cup 	0.1 	8
Cheddar cheese, 1½ ounces 	0 	0
Chicken, meat and skin, roasted, 3 ounces 	0 	0
Apple, sliced, 1 cup 	0 	0

*DV = Daily Value. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) developed DVs to help consumers compare the nutrient contents of foods and dietary supplements within the context of a total diet. The DV for thiamin is 1.2 mg for adults and children age 4 years and older [11]. FDA does not require food labels to list thiamin content unless thiamin has been added to the food. Foods providing 20% or more of the DV are considered to be high sources of a nutrient, but foods providing lower percentages of the DV also contribute to a healthful diet.

The U.S. Department of Agriculture’s (USDA’s) FoodData Central website [10] lists the nutrient content of many foods and provides a comprehensive list of foods containing thiamin arranged by nutrient content and by food name.
Dietary supplements

Thiamin is available in many dietary supplements. Multivitamin/mineral supplements with thiamin typically provide about 1.5 mg thiamin and sometimes more [12]. Supplements containing B-complex vitamins (including thiamin) or thiamin only are also available. The most commonly used forms of thiamin in supplements are thiamin mononitrate and thiamin hydrochloride, which are stable and water soluble [1,12].

Benfotiamine is a synthetic thiamin derivative that is used in some dietary supplements. Benfotiamine is not water soluble and is converted to thiamin in the body [13].
Thiamin Intakes and Status

Most people in the United States consume the recommended amounts of thiamin. An analysis of data from the 2003–2006 National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey showed that only 6% of the U.S. population has a usual intake below the EAR [9].

Among children and teens, the average daily thiamin intake from foods is 1.27 mg for ages 2–5 years, 1.54 mg for ages 6–11 years, and 1.68 mg for ages 12–19 years [14]. In adults age 20 and older, the average daily thiamin intake from foods is 1.95 mg in men and 1.39 mg in women. The average daily thiamin intake from foods and supplements in children and teens is 1.51 mg for ages 2–5 years, 1.76 mg for ages 6–11 years, and 1.95 mg for ages 12–19 years. In adults age 20 and older, the average daily thiamin intake from foods and supplements is 4.89 mg in men and 4.90 mg in women.

No current data on rates of thiamin deficiency in the U.S. population are available.
Thiamin Deficiency

In addition to insufficient intakes of thiamin from the diet, the causes of thiamin deficiency include lower absorption or higher excretion rates than normal due, for example, to certain conditions (such as alcohol dependence or HIV/AIDS) or use of some medications [3].

In its early stage, thiamin deficiency can cause weight loss and anorexia, confusion, short-term memory loss, and other mental signs and symptoms; muscle weakness; and cardiovascular symptoms (such as an enlarged heart) [7].

The most common effect of thiamin deficiency is beriberi, which is characterized mainly by peripheral neuropathy and wasting [1-3]. People with this condition have impaired sensory, motor, and reflex functions. In rare cases, beriberi causes congestive heart failure that leads to edema in the lower limbs and, occasionally, death [1,3]. Although beriberi is rare in the United States and other developed countries, people in these countries do occasionally develop the condition [15-18]. Administration of supplemental thiamin, often parenterally, quickly cures beriberi [2,3].

A more common manifestation of thiamin deficiency in the United States is Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome [2]. This disorder is about 8–10 times more common in people with chronic alcoholism than in the general population, but it can also develop in patients who have severe gastrointestinal disorders, rapidly progressing hematologic malignancies, drug use disorders, or AIDS [2]. In many patients, Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome has two phases. The first, acute, and life-threatening stage, Wernicke’s encephalopathy, is usually characterized by peripheral neuropathy [3,19]. Without treatment, up to 20% of people with Wernicke’s encephalopathy die; those who survive develop Korsakoff’s psychosis, although some people with Korsakoff’s psychosis have not previously had Wernicke’s encephalopathy [20,21]. Korsakoff’s psychosis, an effect of chronic thiamin deficiency, is associated with severe short-term memory loss, disorientation, and confabulation (confusion between real and imagined memories) [1-3]. At this chronic state of the disorder, parenteral thiamin treatment does not lead to recovery in about one-quarter of patients [22].

The World Health Organization recommends daily oral doses of 10 mg thiamin for a week, followed by 3–5 mg/daily for at least 6 weeks, to treat mild thiamin deficiency [23]. The recommended treatment for severe deficiency consists of 25–30 mg intravenously in infants and 50–100 mg in adults, then 10 mg daily administered intramuscularly for approximately 1 week, followed by 3–5 mg/day oral thiamin for at least 6 weeks.
Groups at Risk of Thiamin Inadequacy

The following groups are among those most likely to have inadequate thiamin status.
People with alcohol dependence

In highly industrialized countries, chronic alcohol use disorders appear to be the most common cause of thiamin deficiency [1]. Up to 80% of people with chronic alcoholism develop thiamin deficiency because ethanol reduces gastrointestinal absorption of thiamin, thiamin stores in the liver, and thiamin phosphorylation [3,19]. Also, people with alcoholism tend to have inadequate intakes of essential nutrients, including thiamin.
Older adults

Up to 20%–30% of older adults have laboratory indicators that suggest some degree of thiamin deficiency [2,7]. Possible reasons include low dietary intakes, a combination of chronic diseases, concomitant use of multiple medications, and low absorption of thiamin as a natural result of aging [24,25]. Some small studies have found that the risk of deficiency is particularly high in elderly people who reside in an institution [26,27].
People with HIV/AIDS

People with HIV infection have an increased risk of thiamin deficiency and its sequelae, including beriberi and Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome [1,28]. Autopsies of 380 people with AIDS found that almost 10% had Wernicke’s encephalopathy [29], and some experts believe that thiamin deficiency is underdiagnosed in this population [30]. The association between thiamin deficiency and HIV/AIDS is probably due to malnutrition as a result of the catabolic state associated with AIDS.
People with diabetes

Some small studies have found that thiamin levels in plasma are up to 76% lower in people with type 1 diabetes than in healthy volunteers and 50%–75% lower in people with type 2 diabetes [31,32]. Other studies have shown a higher risk of thiamin deficiency in people with type 1 and/or type 2 diabetes based on tests of erythrocyte transketolase activity [33,34]. These lower thiamin levels might be due to increases in clearance of thiamin by the kidneys. The relevance of these effects to clinical prognosis or outcomes is not known.
People who have undergone bariatric surgery

Bariatric surgery for weight loss is associated with some risks, including severe thiamin deficiency due to malabsorption that can lead to beriberi or Wernicke’s encephalopathy. A 2008 literature review identified 84 cases of Wernicke’s encephalopathy after bariatric surgery (primarily gastric bypass surgery) between 1991 and 2008 [35]. About half of these patients experienced long-lasting neurologic impairments. Micronutrient supplements that include thiamin are almost always recommended for patients following bariatric surgery to avoid deficiencies [36].
Thiamin and Health

This section focuses on four diseases or disorders in which thiamin does or might play a role: Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome, diabetes, heart failure, and Alzheimer’s disease.
Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome

Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome is one of the most severe neuropsychiatric sequelae of alcohol abuse [37]. The authors of a 2013 Cochrane Review of thiamin to treat or prevent Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome found only two studies that met their inclusion criteria, and one of these studies has not been published [37]. These randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials compared 5 mg/day by mouth for 2 weeks or daily intramuscular doses of 5 to 200 mg/day thiamin over 2 consecutive days in a total of 177 people with a history of chronic alcohol use. The Cochrane Review authors concluded that the evidence from randomized clinical trials is insufficient to guide health care providers in selecting the appropriate dose, frequency, duration, or route of thiamin supplementation to treat or prevent Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome in patients with alcohol abuse.

The authors of the European Federation of Neurological Societies guidelines for diagnosing, preventing, and treating Wernicke’s encephalopathy note that even high doses of oral thiamin supplements might not be effective in raising blood thiamin levels or curing Wernicke’s encephalopathy [38]. They recommend 200 mg thiamin, preferably intravenously, three times daily (total of 600 mg/day) until the signs and symptoms stop, along with a balanced diet. In its guidelines for managing Wernicke’s encephalopathy in emergency departments, the Royal College of Physicians in London supports the administration of oral thiamin hydrochloride (100 mg three times a day) in patients with adequate dietary intakes of thiamin and no signs or symptoms of Wernicke’s encephalopathy [39]. However, the authors recommend parenteral thiamin supplementation for patients at high risk, such as those with ataxia, confusion, and a history of chronic alcohol misuse, because oral supplementation is unlikely to produce adequate blood levels.
Diabetes

The proportion of people with type 1 or type 2 diabetes who have poor thiamin status based on erythrocyte transketolase activity ranges from 17% to 79% in studies conducted to date [40]. In a study of 76 consecutive patients with type 1 or type 2 diabetes, for example, 8% had mild thiamin deficiency and 32% had moderate deficiency based on assays of the transketolase enzyme [33].

Some small studies have shown that oral supplementation with 150–300 mg/day thiamin can decrease glucose levels in patients with type 2 diabetes or impaired glucose tolerance [41,42]. However, the authors of these studies did not assess the potential clinical significance of these findings.

A few small randomized studies have assessed the effects of benfotiamine supplements on diabetic neuropathy. Three studies found that, compared to placebo, 120–900 mg/day benfotiamine with or without other B-vitamins decreased the severity of neuropathy symptoms and lowered urinary albumin excretion (a marker of early-stage diabetic nephropathy) [43-45]. However, another study found no effect of 900 mg/day benfotiamine on urinary excretion of albumin or kidney injury molecule-1, a marker of kidney injury [46].

Well-designed studies with larger sample sizes and longer durations are required to determine whether thiamin supplements can reduce glucose levels in patients with diabetes or decrease diabetic compications.
Heart failure

The rates of poor thiamin status in patients with heart failure have ranged in studies from 21% to 98% [47]. Explanations for this association include older age, comorbidities, insufficient dietary intake, treatment with diuretics, and frequent hospitalizations [48].

The authors of one study reported that 33% of 100 patients with chronic heart failure had thiamin deficiency compared to 12% of 50 healthy volunteers [49]. Rates of deficiency were even higher when the investigators excluded those who used thiamin supplements. The different rates of thiamin deficiency in patients with heart failure in these and other studies are probably due to differences in nutrition status, comorbidities, medications and dietary supplements used, and techniques used to measure thiamin status [48].

The authors of a systematic literature review and meta-analysis found two randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials of thiamin supplementation in people with heart failure that met their eligibility criteria [50]. In these trials, thiamin supplements significantly improved net change in left ventricular ejection fraction. The authors did not assess the clinical significance of this finding, however.

More research is needed to determine whether thiamin supplements might benefit people with heart failure, even if they have normal thiamin status.
Alzheimer’s disease

According to animal model studies, thiamin deficiency might play a role in the development of Alzheimer’s disease [51]. For example, thiamin deficiency produces oxidative stress in neurons, death of neurons, loss of memory, plaque formation, and changes in glucose metabolism—all markers of Alzheimer’s disease. Autopsy studies have shown that transketolase and other thiamin-dependent enzymes have decreased activity in the brains of people with Alzheimer’s disease [52,53].

Few studies have assessed the prevalence of thiamin deficiency in people with Alzheimer’s disease. One of these studies found that 13% of 150 patients with cognitive impairment and acute-onset behavioral disturbances were considered thiamin deficient based on plasma levels [26].

The authors of a 2001 Cochrane Review assessed three double-blind, randomized trials (including two crossover trials) that compared the effects of 3 g/day oral thiamin to placebo on cognitive function in patients with Alzheimer’s type dementia [54]. The three studies randomly assigned fewer than 20 patients each, and the two crossover studies did not include a washout period [55-57]. The review authors stated that it was not possible to draw any conclusions from these three studies because they were small and the publications describing them did not provide enough detail to combine these data in a meta-analysis.

Larger, well-designed studies are needed to determine whether thiamin supplements are beneficial for Alzheimer’s disease.
Health Risks from Excessive Thiamin

The body excretes excess amounts of thiamin in the urine [2]. Because of the lack of reports of adverse effects from high thiamin intakes (50 mg/day or more) from food or supplements, the FNB did not establish ULs for thiamin [7]. They hypothesize that the apparent lack of toxicity may be explained by the rapid decline in absorption of thiamin at intakes above 5 mg. However, the FNB noted that in spite of the lack of reported adverse events, excessive intakes of thiamin could have adverse effects.
Interactions with Medications

Although thiamin is not known to interact with any medications, certain medications can have an adverse effect on thiamin levels. Some examples are provided below. Individuals taking these and other medications on a regular basis should discuss their thiamin status with their health care providers.
Furosemide

Furosemide (Lasix) is a loop diuretic used to treat edema and hypertension by increasing urinary output. Research has linked the use of furosemide to decreases in thiamin concentrations, possibly to deficient levels, as a result of urinary thiamin loss [49,58,59]. Whether thiamin supplements are effective for preventing thiamin deficiency in patients taking loop diuretics needs to be determined in clinical studies.
Chemotherapy with fluorouracil

Fluorouracil (also known as 5-fluorouracil; Adrucil) is a chemotherapy drug that is commonly used to treat colorectal and other solid cancers. The published literature includes several cases of beriberi or Wernicke’s encephalopathy resulting from treatment with this drug, possibly because the drug might increase thiamin metabolism and block the formation of TDP, the active form of thiamin [60-63]. Thiamin supplements might reverse some of these effects.
Thiamin and Healthful Diets

The federal government's 2020–2025 Dietary Guidelines for Americans notes that "Because foods provide an array of nutrients and other components that have benefits for health, nutritional needs should be met primarily through foods. ... In some cases, fortified foods and dietary supplements are useful when it is not possible otherwise to meet needs for one or more nutrients (e.g., during specific life stages such as pregnancy)."

For more information about building a healthy dietary pattern, refer to the Dietary Guidelines for Americans and the USDA's MyPlate.

The Dietary Guidelines for Americans describes a healthy dietary pattern as one that

    Includes a variety of vegetables; fruits; grains (at least half whole grains); fat-free and low-fat milk, yogurt, and cheese; and oils.
        Many whole grains are good sources of thiamin, and yogurt contains thiamin.
    Includes a variety of protein foods such as lean meats; poultry; eggs; seafood; beans, peas, and lentils; nuts and seeds; and soy products.
        ​​​​​​​Pork, fish, and seafood are good or high sources of thiamin. Beef, beans, and seeds contain thiamin.
    Limits foods and beverages higher in added sugars, saturated fat, and sodium.
    Limits alcoholic beverages.
    Stays within your daily calorie needs.

References

    Said HM. Thiamin. In: Coates PM, Betz JM, Blackman MR, et al., eds. Encyclopedia of Dietary Supplements. 2nd ed. London and New York: Informa Healthcare; 2010:748-53.
    Bettendorff L. Thiamin. In: Erdman JW, Macdonald IA, Zeisel SH, eds. Present Knowledge in Nutrition. 10th ed. Washington, DC: Wiley-Blackwell; 2012:261-79.
    Bemeur C, Butterworth RF. Thiamin. In: Ross AC, Caballero B, Cousins RJ, Tucker KL, Ziegler TR, eds. Modern Nutrition in Health and Disease. 11th ed. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2014:317-24.
    Nabokina SM, Said HM. A high-affinity and specific carrier-mediated mechanism for uptake of thiamine pyrophosphate by human colonic epithelial cells. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2012;303:G389-95. [PubMed abstract]
    Allen L, de Benoist B, Dary O, Hurrell R, eds. Guidelines on Food Fortiﬁcation with Micronutrients. Geneva: World Health Organization and Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations; 2006.
    Gibson GE, Blass JP. Thiamine-dependent processes and treatment strategies in neurodegeneration. Antioxid Redox Signal 2007;9:1605-19. [PubMed abstract]
    Institute of Medicine. Food and Nutrition Board. Dietary Reference Intakes: Thiamin, Riboflavin, Niacin, Vitamin B6, Folate, Vitamin B12, Pantothenic Acid, Biotin, and Choline. Washington, DC: National Academy Press; 1998.
    Sharma S, Sheehy T, Kolonel LN. Ethnic differences in grains consumption and their contribution to intake of B-vitamins: results of the Multiethnic Cohort Study. Nutr J 2013;12:65. [PubMed abstract]
    Fulgoni VL, 3rd, Keast DR, Bailey RL, Dwyer J. Foods, fortificants, and supplements: Where do Americans get their nutrients? J Nutr 2011;141:1847-54. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service. FoodData Central, 2019.
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Food Labeling: Revision of the Nutrition and Supplement Facts Labels. 2016.
    National Institutes of Health. Dietary Supplement Label Database. 2014.
    Aguilar F, Charrondiere UR, Dusemund B, Galtier P, Gilbert J, Gott DM, et al. Benfotiamine, thiamine monophosphate chloride and thiamine pyrophosphate chloride, as sources of vitamin B1 added for nutritional purposes to food supplements: Scientific Opinion of the Panel on Food Additives and Nutrient Sources added to Food (ANS). EFSA J 2008;864:1-31.
    U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service. What We Eat in America, 2009-2010. 2012.
    Yang JD, Acharya K, Evans M, Marsh JD, Beland S. Beriberi disease: is it still present in the United States? Am J Med 2012;125:e5. [PubMed abstract]
    Howard AJ, Kulkarni O, Lekwuwa G, Emsley HC. Rapidly progressive polyneuropathy due to dry beriberi in a man: a case report. J Med Case Rep 2010;4:409. [PubMed abstract]
    Essa E, Velez MR, Smith S, Giri S, Raman SV, Gumina RJ. Cardiovascular magnetic resonance in wet beriberi. J Cardiovasc Magn Reson 2011;13:41. [PubMed abstract]
    Imai N, Kubota M, Saitou M, Yagi N, Serizawa M, Kobari M. Increase of serum vascular endothelial growth factors in wet beriberi: two case reports. Intern Med 2012;51:929-32. [PubMed abstract]
    Agabio R. Thiamine administration in alcohol-dependent patients. Alcohol Alcohol 2005;40:155-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Thomson AD, Marshall EJ. The natural history and pathophysiology of Wernicke's Encephalopathy and Korsakoff's Psychosis. Alcohol Alcohol 2006;41:151-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Thomson AD, Guerrini I, Marshall EJ. The evolution and treatment of Korsakoff's syndrome: out of sight, out of mind? Neuropsychol Rev 2012;22:81-92.
    [PubMed abstract]
    Kopelman MD, Thomson AD, Guerrini I, Marshall EJ. The Korsakoff syndrome: clinical aspects, psychology and treatment. Alcohol Alcohol 2009;44:148-54. [PubMed abstract]
    World Health Organization. Thiamine Deficiency and Its Prevention and Control in Major Emergencies. Geneva; 1999. 
    Vognar L, Stoukides J. The role of low plasma thiamin levels in cognitively impaired elderly patients presenting with acute behavioral disturbances. J Am Geriatr Soc 2009;57:2166-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Wilkinson TJ, Hanger HC, George PM, Sainsbury R. Is thiamine deficiency in elderly people related to age or co-morbidity? Age and Ageing 2000;29:111-6. [PubMed abstract]
    O'Rourke NP, Bunker VW, Thomas AJ, Finglas PM, Bailey AL, Clayton BE. Thiamine Status of Healthy and Institutionalized Elderly Subjects: Analysis of Dietary Intake and Biochemical Indices. Age Ageing 1990;19:325-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Ito Y, Yamanaka K, Susaki H, Igata A. A cross-investigation between thiamin deficiency and the physical condition of elderly people who require nursing care. J Nutr Sci Vitaminol (Tokyo) 2012;58:210-6.
    [PubMed abstract]
    Lu'o'ng KV, Nguyen LT. The role of thiamine in cancer: possible genetic and cellular signaling mechanisms. Cancer Genomics Proteomics 2013;10:169-85.
    [PubMed abstract]
    Boldorini R, Vago L, Lechi A, Tedeschi F, Trabattoni GR. Wernicke's encephalopathy: occurrence and pathological aspects in a series of 400 AIDS patients. Acta Biomed Ateneo Parmense 1992;63:43-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Larsen TR, Dragu D, Williams M. Wernicke's Encephalopathy: An Unusual Consequence of the Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome-Case Report and Literature Review. Case Rep Med 2013;2013:709474. [PubMed abstract]
    Thornalley PJ, Babaei-Jadidi R, Al Ali H, Rabbani N, Antonysunil A, Larkin J, et al. High prevalence of low plasma thiamine concentration in diabetes linked to a marker of vascular disease. Diabetologia 2007;50:2164-70. [PubMed abstract]
    Al-Attas OS, Al-Daghri NM, Alfadda AA, Abd-Alrahman SH, Sabico S. Blood thiamine and its phosphate esters as measured by high-performance liquid chromatography: levels and associations in diabetes mellitus patients with varying degrees of microalbuminuria. J Endocrinol Invest 2012;35:951-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Jermendy G. Evaluating thiamine deficiency in patients with diabetes. Diab Vasc Dis Res 2006;3:120-1. [PubMed abstract]
    Saito N, Kimura M, Kuchiba A, Itokawa Y. Blood thiamine levels in outpatients with diabetes mellitus. J Nutr Sci Vitaminol (Tokyo) 1987;33:421-30. [PubMed abstract]
    Aasheim ET. Wernicke encephalopathy after bariatric surgery: a systematic review. Ann Surg 2008;248:714-20. [PubMed abstract]
    Xanthakos SA. Nutritional deficiencies in obesity and after bariatric surgery. Pediatr Clin North Am 2009;56:1105-21. [PubMed abstract]
    Day E, Bentham PW, Callaghan R, Kuruvilla T, George S. Thiamine for prevention and treatment of Wernicke-Korsakoff Syndrome in people who abuse alcohol. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2013;7:CD004033. [PubMed abstract]
    Galvin R, Brathen G, Ivashynka A, Hillbom M, Tanasescu R, Leone MA. EFNS guidelines for diagnosis, therapy and prevention of Wernicke encephalopathy. Eur J Neurol 2010;17:1408-18.
    [PubMed abstract]
    Thomson AD, Cook CC, Touquet R, Henry JA. The Royal College of Physicians report on alcohol: guidelines for managing Wernicke's encephalopathy in the accident and Emergency Department. Alcohol Alcohol 2002;37:513-21. [PubMed abstract]
    Page GL, Laight D, Cummings MH. Thiamine deficiency in diabetes mellitus and the impact of thiamine replacement on glucose metabolism and vascular disease. Int J Clin Pract 2011;65:684-90.
    [PubMed abstract]
    Gonzalez-Ortiz M, Martinez-Abundis E, Robles-Cervantes JA, Ramirez-Ramirez V, Ramos-Zavala MG. Effect of thiamine administration on metabolic profile, cytokines and inflammatory markers in drug-naive patients with type 2 diabetes. Eur J Nutr 2011;50:145-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Alaei Shahmiri F, Soares MJ, Zhao Y, Sherriff J. High-dose thiamine supplementation improves glucose tolerance in hyperglycemic individuals: a randomized, double-blind cross-over trial. Eur J Nutr 2013;52:1821-4. [PubMed abstract]
    Stracke H, Gaus W, Achenbach U, Federlin K, Bretzel RG. Benfotiamine in diabetic polyneuropathy (BENDIP): results of a randomised, double blind, placebo-controlled clinical study. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes 2008;116:600-5. [PubMed abstract]
    Carpenter KJ. The discovery of thiamin. Ann Nutr Metab 2012;61:219-23. [PubMed abstract]
    Rabbani N, Alam SS, Riaz S, Larkin JR, Akhtar MW, Shafi T, et al. High-dose thiamine therapy for patients with type 2 diabetes and microalbuminuria: a randomised, double-blind placebo-controlled pilot study. Diabetologia 2009;52:208-12. [PubMed abstract]
    Alkhalaf A, Klooster A, van Oeveren W, Achenbach U, Kleefstra N, Slingerland RJ, et al. A double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trial on benfotiamine treatment in patients with diabetic nephropathy. Diabetes Care 2010;33:1598-601. [PubMed abstract]
    Wooley JA. Characteristics of thiamin and its relevance to the management of heart failure. Nutr Clin Pract 2008;23:487-93.
    [PubMed abstract]
    DiNicolantonio JJ, Niazi AK, Lavie CJ, O'Keefe JH, Ventura HO. Thiamine supplementation for the treatment of heart failure: a review of the literature. Congest Heart Fail 2013;19:214-22.
    [PubMed abstract]
    Hanninen SA, Darling PB, Sole MJ, Barr A, Keith ME. The prevalence of thiamin deficiency in hospitalized patients with congestive heart failure. J Am Coll Cardiol  2006;47:354-61.
    [PubMed abstract]
    DiNicolantonio JJ, Lavie CJ, Niazi AK, O'Keefe JH, Hu T. Effects of thiamine on cardiac function in patients with systolic heart failure: systematic review and metaanalysis of randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials. Ochsner J 2013;13:495-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Gibson GE, Hirsch JA, Cirio RT, Jordan BD, Fonzetti P, Elder J. Abnormal thiamine-dependent processes in Alzheimer's Disease. Lessons from diabetes. Mol Cell Neurosci 2013;55:17-25. [PubMed abstract]
    Gibson GE, Sheu KF, Blass JP, Baker A, Carlson KC, Harding B, et al. Reduced activities of thiamine-dependent enzymes in the brains and peripheral tissues of patients with Alzheimer's disease. Arch Neurol 1988;45:836-40. [PubMed abstract]
    Butterworth RF, Besnard AM. Thiamine-dependent enzyme changes in temporal cortex of patients with Alzheimer's disease. Metab Brain Dis 1990;5:179-84. [PubMed abstract]
    Rodriguez-Martin JL, Qizilbash N, Lopez-Arrieta JM. Thiamine for Alzheimer's disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2001:CD001498. [PubMed abstract]
    Blass JP, Gleason P, Brush D, DiPonte P, Thaler H. Thiamine and Alzheimer's disease. A pilot study. Arch Neurol 1988;45:833-5.
    [PubMed abstract]
    Nolan KA, Black RS, Sheu KF, Langberg J, Blass JP. A trial of thiamine in Alzheimer's disease. Arch Neurol 1991;48:81-3. [PubMed abstract]
    Meador K, Loring D, Nichols M, Zamrini E, Rivner M, Posas H, et al. Preliminary findings of high-dose thiamine in dementia of Alzheimer's type. J Geriatr Psychiatry Neurol 1993;6:222-9.
    [PubMed abstract]
    Seligmann H, Halkin H, Rauchfleisch S, Kaufmann N, Motro M, Vered Z, et al. Thiamine deficiency in patients with congestive heart failure receiving long-term furosemide therapy: a pilot study. Am J Med 1991;91:151-5.
    [PubMed abstract]
    Zenuk C, Healey J, Donnelly J, Vaillancourt R, Almalki Y, Smith S. Thiamine deficiency in congestive heart failure patients receiving long term furosemide therapy. Can J Clin Pharmacol 2003;10:184-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Cho IJ, Chang HJ, Lee KE, Won HS, Choi MY, Nam EM, et al. A case of Wernicke's encephalopathy following fluorouracil-based chemotherapy. J Korean Med Sci 2009;24:747-50. [PubMed abstract]
    Kondo K, Fujiwara M, Murase M, Kodera Y, Akiyama S, Ito K, et al. Severe acute metabolic acidosis and Wernicke's encephalopathy following chemotherapy with 5-fluorouracil and cisplatin: case report and review of the literature. Jpn J Clin Oncol 1996;26:234-6.
    [PubMed abstract]
    Papila B, Yildiz O, Tural D, Delil S, Hasiloglu ZI, Ayan F, et al. Wernicke's Encephalopathy in Colon Cancer. Case Rep Oncol 2010;3:362-7.
    [PubMed abstract]
    Rosen A, van Kuilenburg A, Assmann B, Kuhlen M, Borkhardt A. Severe encephalopathy, lactic acidosis, vegetative instability and neuropathy with 5-Fluorouracil treatment - pyrimidine degradation defect or beriberi? Case Rep Oncol 2011;4:371-6. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Department of Agriculture, US DHHS. Dietary Guidelines for Americans, 2010. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office; 2010.

Disclaimer

This fact sheet by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Office of Dietary Supplements (ODS) provides information that should not take the place of medical advice. We encourage you to talk to your health care providers (doctor, registered dietitian, pharmacist, etc.) about your interest in, questions about, or use of dietary supplements and what may be best for your overall health. Any mention in this publication of a specific product or service, or recommendation from an organization or professional society, does not represent an endorsement by ODS of that product, service, or expert advice.

Updated: February 9, 2023


 Vitamin A and Carotenoids: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals (original version)
Vitamin A and Carotenoids: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals
Table of Contents

    Introduction
    Recommended Intakes
    Sources of Vitamin A
    Vitamin A Intakes and Status
    Vitamin A Deficiency
    Groups at Risk of Vitamin A Inadequacy
    Vitamin A and Health
    Health Risks from Excessive Vitamin A
    Interactions with Medications
    Vitamin A and Healthful Diets
    References
    Disclaimer

Introduction

Vitamin A is the name of a group of fat-soluble retinoids, primarily retinol and retinyl esters [1,2]. Vitamin A is involved in immune function, cellular communication, growth and development, and male and female reproduction [1-3]. Vitamin A supports cell growth and differentiation, playing a critical role in the normal formation and maintenance of the heart, lungs, eyes, and other organs [1,2]. Vitamin A is also critical for vision as an essential component of rhodopsin, the light-sensitive protein in the retina that responds to light entering the eye, and because it supports the normal differentiation and functioning of the conjunctival membranes and cornea [2,4].

The human diet contains two sources for vitamin A: preformed vitamin A (retinol and retinyl esters) and provitamin A carotenoids [1,5]. Preformed vitamin A is found in foods from animal sources, including dairy products, eggs, fish, and organ meats [1,2]. Provitamin A carotenoids are plant pigments that include beta-carotene, alpha-carotene, and beta-cryptoxanthin [1]. The body converts provitamin A carotenoids into vitamin A in the intestine via the beta-carotene monooxygenase type 1 BCMO1 enzyme [1,3,6], although conversion rates may have genetic variability [7,8,9]. Other carotenoids in food, such as lycopene, lutein, and zeaxanthin, are not converted into vitamin A and are referred to as non-provitamin A carotenoids; they might have other important activities not involving vitamin A formation [1].

The various forms of vitamin A are solubilized into micelles in the intestinal lumen and absorbed by duodenal mucosal cells [5]. Retinyl esters and provitamin A carotenoids are converted to retinol after uptake into the lumen (for retinyl esters) or absorption (for provitamin A carotenoids). Retinol is then oxidized to retinal and retinoic acid, the two main active vitamin A metabolites in the body [1]. Most of the body’s vitamin A is stored in the liver in the form of retinyl esters [1].

Retinol and carotenoid levels are typically measured in plasma or serum because blood samples are easy to collect [1]. However, these levels are not always reliable indicators of vitamin A status because they do not decline until vitamin A levels in the liver and other storage sites are almost depleted and because acute and chronic infections can decrease serum and plasma retinol concentrations [1]. Most vitamin A is stored in the liver, so measuring vitamin A levels in the liver is the best way to assess vitamin A adequacy [1]. In clinical studies, specialized research laboratories can measure liver vitamin A reserves indirectly using isotope-dilution or dose-response methods, in which plasma levels of retinol, a tracer surrogate, or both are measured over several days after the administration of vitamin A [1].

In clinical practice, plasma retinol levels alone can be used to document significant deficiency. A serum or plasma retinol concentration of 20 mcg/dL (0.70 micromoles/L) or less frequently reflects moderate vitamin A deficiency, and a level of 10 mcg/dL (0.35 micromoles/L) or less is considered an indicator of severe vitamin A deficiency [1].
Recommended Intakes

Intake recommendations for vitamin A and other nutrients are provided in the Dietary Reference Intakes (DRIs) developed by the Food and Nutrition Board (FNB) at the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine [5]. DRI is the general term for a set of reference values used for planning and assessing nutrient intakes of healthy people. These values, which vary by age and sex, include the following:

    Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA): Average daily level of intake sufficient to meet the nutrient requirements of nearly all (97%–98%) healthy individuals; often used to plan nutritionally adequate diets for individuals
    Adequate Intake (AI): Intake at this level is assumed to ensure nutritional adequacy; established when evidence is insufficient to develop an RDA
    Estimated Average Requirement (EAR): Average daily level of intake estimated to meet the requirements of 50% of healthy individuals; usually used to assess the nutrient intakes of groups of people and to plan nutritionally adequate diets for them; can also be used to assess the nutrient intakes of individuals
    Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL): Maximum daily intake unlikely to cause adverse health effects

RDAs for vitamin A are given as retinol activity equivalents (RAE) to account for the different bioactivities of retinol and provitamin A carotenoids, all of which are converted by the body into retinol (see Table 1). One mcg RAE is equivalent to 1 mcg retinol, 2 mcg supplemental beta-carotene, 12 mcg dietary beta-carotene, or 24 mcg dietary alpha-carotene or beta-cryptoxanthin [5].
Table 1: Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDAs) for Vitamin A [5] Age 	Male 	Female 	Pregnancy 	Lactation
Birth to 6 months* 	400 mcg RAE 	400 mcg RAE 		
7–12 months* 	500 mcg RAE 	500 mcg RAE 		
1–3 years 	300 mcg RAE 	300 mcg RAE 		
4–8 years 	400 mcg RAE 	400 mcg RAE 		
9–13 years 	600 mcg RAE 	600 mcg RAE 		
14–18 years 	900 mcg RAE 	700 mcg RAE 	750 mcg RAE 	1,200 mcg RAE
19–50 years 	900 mcg RAE 	700 mcg RAE 	770 mcg RAE 	1,300 mcg RAE
51+ years 	900 mcg RAE 	700 mcg RAE 		

*AI, equivalent to the mean intake of vitamin A in healthy, breastfed infants.

The units of measurement for vitamin A are now mcg RAE, but International Units (IUs) were previously used [10]. To convert IU to mcg RAE, use the following [11-13]:

    1 IU retinol = 0.3 mcg RAE
    1 IU supplemental beta-carotene = 0.3 mcg RAE
    1 IU dietary beta-carotene = 0.05 mcg RAE
    1 IU dietary alpha-carotene or beta-cryptoxanthin = 0.025 mcg RAE

RAE can only be directly converted into IUs if the sources of vitamin A are known. For example, the RDA of 900 mcg RAE for adolescent and adult men is equivalent to 3,000 IU if the food or supplement source is preformed vitamin A (retinol) or if the supplement source is beta-carotene. This RDA is also equivalent to 18,000 IU beta-carotene from food or to 36,000 IU alpha-carotene or beta-cryptoxanthin from food. Therefore, a mixed diet containing 900 mcg RAE provides between 3,000 and 36,000 IU vitamin A, depending on the foods consumed.
Sources of Vitamin A
Food

Concentrations of preformed vitamin A are highest in liver, fish, eggs, and dairy products [1]. Most dietary provitamin A in the U.S. diet comes from leafy green vegetables, orange and yellow vegetables, tomato products, fruits, and some vegetable oils [1,5,14]. Vitamin A is routinely added to some foods, including milk and margarine [1,2]. Some ready-to-eat cereals are also fortified with vitamin A.

About 65% to 80% of vitamin A consumed in the United States and other high-income countries comes from preformed vitamin A, whereas provitamin A is the main form consumed in low-income countries, where diets include more plant-based foods [2,15]. Among U.S. children and adolescents, enriched and fortified foods account for 34%–40% of vitamin A intakes from food [16].

The body might absorb up to 75% to 100% of retinol and, in most cases, 10% to 30% of beta-carotene from foods [17,18]. Cooking and heat treatment can increase the bioavailability of beta-carotene from foods [19].

Table 2 lists a variety of foods and their vitamin A content per serving. The foods from animal sources in Table 2 contain primarily preformed vitamin A, the plant-based foods have provitamin A, and the foods with a mixture of ingredients from animals and plants contain both preformed vitamin A and provitamin A.
Table 2: Vitamin A Content of Selected Foods [20] Food 	microgram (mcg) RAE
per serving 	Percent
DV*
Beef liver, pan fried, 3 ounces 	6,582 	731
Sweet potato, baked in skin, 1 whole 	1,403 	156
Spinach, frozen, boiled, ½ cup 	573 	64
Pumpkin pie, commercially prepared, 1 piece 	488 	54
Carrots, raw, ½ cup 	459 	51
Herring, Atlantic, pickled, 3 ounces 	219 	24
Ice cream, French vanilla, soft serve, ⅔ cup 	185 	21
Milk, skim, with added vitamin A and vitamin D, 1 cup 	149 	17
Cantaloupe, raw, ½ cup 	135 	15
Cheese, ricotta, part skim, ½ cup 	133 	15
Peppers, sweet, red, raw, ½ cup 	117 	13
Mangos, raw, 1 whole 	112 	12
Breakfast cereals, fortified with 10% of the DV for vitamin A, 1 serving 	90 	10
Egg, hard boiled, 1 large 	75 	8
Black-eyed peas (cowpeas), boiled, 1 cup 	66 	7
Apricots, dried, sulfured, 5 apricots 	63 	7
Broccoli, boiled, ½ cup 	60 	7
Salmon, sockeye, cooked, 3 ounces 	59 	7
Tomato juice, canned, ¾ cup 	42 	5
Yogurt, plain, low fat, 1 cup 	32 	4
Tuna, light, canned in oil, drained, 3 ounces 	20 	2
Baked beans, canned, plain or vegetarian, 1 cup 	13 	1
Summer squash, all varieties, boiled, ½ cup 	10 	1
Chicken, breast meat and skin, roasted, ½ breast 	5 	1
Pistachio nuts, dry roasted, 1 ounce 	4 	0

*DV = Daily Value. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) developed DVs to help consumers compare the nutrient contents of foods and dietary supplements within the context of a total diet. The DV for vitamin A is 900 mcg RAE for adults and children age 4 years and older [11], where 1 mcg RAE = 1 mcg retinol, 2 mcg beta-carotene from supplements, 12 mcg beta-carotene from foods, 24 mcg alpha-carotene, or 24 mcg beta-cryptoxanthin. FDA does not require food labels to list vitamin A content unless vitamin A has been added to the food. Foods providing 20% or more of the DV are considered to be high sources of a nutrient, but foods providing lower percentages of the DV also contribute to a healthful diet.

The U.S. Department of Agriculture’s (USDA’s) FoodData Central lists the nutrient content of many foods and provides a comprehensive list of foods containing vitamin A arranged by nutrient content and by food name.
Dietary supplements

Vitamin A is available in stand-alone supplements and most multivitamins, often in the form of retinyl acetate, retinyl palmitate, provitamin A beta-carotene, or a combination [1,21]. Amounts of vitamin A in supplements vary widely, but 3,000 mcg RAE (333% of the DV) is common [21]. Multivitamins commonly have somewhat lower amounts, often 750 to 1,050 mcg RAE (83% to 117% of the DV).

The absorption of preformed vitamin A esters from dietary supplements is 70%–90%, and that of beta-carotene ranges from 8.7% to 65% [19,22].
Vitamin A Intakes and Status

Average daily intakes of vitamin A from foods and beverages in the United States were 682 mcg RAE for men age 20 and older and 616 mcg RAE for women in 2017–2018, according to the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) [23]. For children age 2–19, mean daily intakes of vitamin A from foods and beverages ranged from 497 to 680 mcg RAE. An analysis of biochemical data from 2003–2006 NHANES data indicates that less than 1% of the U.S. population has a serum retinol level of less than 20 mcg/dL, which indicates that vitamin A deficiency is uncommon in the U.S. population [24].

Data from NHANES III, conducted from 1988 to 1994, showed that approximately 26% of the vitamin A in RAEs consumed by men and 34% of that consumed by women in the United States comes from provitamin A carotenoids [5]. The remainder comes from preformed vitamin A, mostly in the form of retinyl esters.

About 12% to 40% of the U.S. population, depending on age, uses supplements containing vitamin A [25]. Adults age 71 years or older and children younger than 9 are more likely than members of other age groups to take supplements containing vitamin A.
Vitamin A Deficiency

Frank vitamin A deficiency is rare in the United States. However, vitamin A deficiency is still common in many developing countries, often as a result of limited access to foods containing preformed vitamin A from animal-based food sources and to foods containing provitamin A carotenoids because of poverty or traditional diets [1,26]. A pooled analysis of population-based surveys from 138 low-income and middle-income countries found that 29% of children age 6 months to 5 years had vitamin A deficiency in 2013 [27]. Deficiency rates were highest in sub-Saharan Africa (48%) and South Asia (44%). In addition, approximately 10% to 20% of pregnant women in low-income countries have vitamin A deficiency [28].

Limited research suggests that vitamin A deficiency may also be influenced by genetic variability in conversion rates of beta-carotene to vitamin A. Certain polymorphisms in the BCMO1 gene have been found to reduce the activity of the BCMO1 enzyme in humans [8,9], and a study in the Philippines among 693 children and adolescents found an inverse association between vitamin A status and the A379V TT variant in the BCMO1 gene [7].

The most common clinical sign of vitamin A deficiency is xerophthalmia, which develops after plasma retinol has been low and the eye’s vitamin A reserves have become depleted. The first sign is night blindness, or the inability to see in low light or darkness as a result of low rhodopsin levels in the retina [1,27,28]. Xerophthalmia also affects the cornea and can eventually lead to permanent blindness; vitamin A deficiency is one of the top causes of preventable blindness in children [28].

Chronic vitamin A deficiency has also been associated with abnormal lung development, respiratory diseases (such as pneumonia), and an increased risk of anemia and death [26,27,29].

Another effect of chronic vitamin A deficiency is increased severity and mortality risk of infections (particularly measles and infection-associated diarrhea) [26]. In 2013, 94,500 children in low-income and middle-income countries died of diarrhea and 11,200 died of measles as a result of vitamin A deficiency [27]. More than 95% of deaths attributable to vitamin A deficiency occurred in sub-Saharan Africa and Asia, where vitamin A deficiency was responsible for 2% of all deaths in children younger than 5 years [27].
Groups at Risk of Vitamin A Inadequacy

The following groups are among those most likely to have inadequate intakes of vitamin A.
Premature infants

Preterm infants have low liver stores of vitamin A at birth, and their plasma concentrations of retinol often remain low throughout the first year of life [30,31]. Preterm infants with vitamin A deficiency have a higher risk of eye and chronic lung diseases [32,33]. However, in high-income countries, clinical vitamin A deficiency is rare in infants and occurs only in those with malabsorption disorders [34].
Infants, children, and pregnant and lactating women in low-income and middle-income countries

Pregnant women need extra vitamin A for fetal growth and tissue maintenance and to support their own metabolism [35-37]. The breast milk of lactating women with adequate vitamin A intakes contains sufficient amounts of vitamin A to meet infants’ needs for the first 6 months of life [38]. However, in people with vitamin A deficiency, the vitamin A content of breast milk is not sufficient to maintain adequate vitamin A stores in infants who are exclusively breastfed [38].

About 190 million preschool-age children (one-third of all children in this age group), mostly in Africa and Southeast Asia, have vitamin A deficiency, according to the World Health Organization [27,39]. They have a higher risk of visual impairment and of illness and death from childhood infections, such as measles and infections that cause diarrheal diseases [1,39].

The World Health Organization estimates that 9.8 million pregnant women (15% of all pregnant women) around the world, mostly in low-income and middle-income countries, have xerophthalmia as a result of vitamin A deficiency [40].
People with cystic fibrosis

Up to 90% of people with cystic fibrosis have pancreatic insufficiency, which increases their risk of vitamin A deficiency due to difficulty absorbing fat [1,41]. Studies in Australia and the Netherlands indicate that 2% to 13% of children and adolescents with cystic fibrosis have vitamin A deficiency [42,43]. As a result, standard care for cystic fibrosis includes lifelong treatment with vitamin A (daily amounts of 750 mcg RAE to 3,000 mcg RAE, depending on age, are recommended in the United States and Australia), other fat-soluble vitamins, and pancreatic enzymes [41,43].
Individuals with gastrointestinal disorders

Approximately one-quarter of children with Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis have vitamin A deficiency; adults with these disorders, especially those who have had the disorder for several years, also have a higher risk of vitamin A deficiency [44,45]. Although some evidence supports the use of vitamin A supplements in people with these disorders [46], other research has found that supplementation offers no benefit [47]. Some children and adults with newly diagnosed celiac disease also have vitamin A deficiency; a gluten-free diet can, but does not always, eliminate this deficiency [48-51].
Vitamin A and Health

This section focuses on three diseases and disorders in which vitamin A or carotenoids might play a role: cancer, age-related macular degeneration (AMD), and measles.
Cancer

Because of its role in regulating cell growth and differentiation, several studies have examined the association between vitamin A and various types of cancer. However, the relationship between serum vitamin A levels or vitamin A supplementation and cancer risk or cancer-related death is unclear. This fact sheet does not include studies of all-trans retinoic acid, a vitamin A metabolite that is used as a drug in high doses to treat a form of leukemia [52,53].

Several systematic reviews and meta-analyses of observational studies have shown that higher dietary intakes of retinol, carotenoids, fruits and vegetables, or a combination are associated with a lower risk of lung cancer [54], non-Hodgkin lymphoma [55], pancreatic cancer [56], oral cavity cancer [57], laryngeal cancer [57], esophageal cancer [58], ovarian cancer [59,60], glioma [61], and bladder cancer [62]. However, other observational studies have found no association between intakes of different forms of vitamin A and risk of liver cancer [63], non-Hodgkin lymphoma [64], colorectal cancer [65], prostate cancer [65], or all cancers [66].

Some clinical trial evidence suggests that supplemental vitamin A might reduce the risk of certain cancers but increase the risk of other forms of cancer, cardiovascular disease morbidity and mortality, and all-cause mortality. Examples are provided below.

The Carotene and Retinol Efficacy Trial (CARET) included 18,314 male and female current and former smokers (with at least a 20 pack-year history [equivalent to smoking 1 pack per day for 20 years or 2 packs per day for 10 years, for example] of cigarette smoking) as well as some men occupationally exposed to asbestos (who also have a higher risk of lung cancer), all age 45–74 years. The study randomized participants to take supplements containing 30 mg beta-carotene plus 25,000 IU (7,500 mcg RAE) retinyl palmitate or a placebo daily for about 6 years to evaluate the potential effects on lung cancer risk [67]. The trial was ended prematurely after a mean of 4 years, partly because the supplements were unexpectedly found to have increased lung cancer risk by 28% and death from lung cancer by 46%; the supplements also increased the risk of all-cause mortality by 17%.

A subsequent study followed CARET participants for an additional 6 years after they stopped taking the study supplements [68]. During this time, the differences in lung cancer risk between the intervention and placebo groups were no longer statistically significant, with one exception: women in the intervention group had a 33% higher risk of lung cancer. In a separate analysis of CARET study data, men who took the two supplements had a 35% lower risk of nonaggressive prostate cancer during the 4-year active trial but not during the 6-year postintervention period. In contrast, men who took these two supplements in addition to another self-prescribed supplement (typically a multivitamin) had a 52% higher risk of aggressive prostate cancer during the active trial, but not during the postintervention period [69].

The Alpha-Tocopherol, Beta-Carotene (ATBC) Cancer Prevention Study also found that beta-carotene supplements increased the risk of lung cancer in smokers [70]. In this study, 29,133 male smokers age 50–69 years who smoked an average of 20.4 cigarettes a day for an average of 35.9 years took a supplement containing 50 mg/day alpha-tocopherol, 20 mg/day beta-carotene, both alpha-tocopherol and beta-carotene, or a placebo for 5–8 years. The beta-carotene supplements increased the risk of lung cancer by 18%, although they had little to no effect on the incidence of other cancers. The overall rate of death, primarily from lung cancer and ischemic heart disease, was 8% higher in participants who took beta-carotene. A subsequent study followed 25,563 of these participants for an additional 18 years [71]. During this period, participants were no longer taking the supplements, but most continued to smoke. Participants who had taken beta-carotene in the original trial did not have a higher risk of lung cancer, but they had a 20% higher risk of death due to prostate cancer.

The Age-Related Eye Disease Study 2 (AREDS2) was a 5-year randomized clinical trial with 4,203 participants age 50–85 years examining the effects on AMD of a dietary supplement containing several ingredients with or without beta-carotene (15 mg [7,500 mcg RAE]) [72]. No current smokers received the supplements containing beta-carotene. At the end of the trial, more lung cancers were discovered in the beta-carotene group than in the no beta-carotene group (23 vs. 11 cases), and 31 of the 34 affected were former smokers. In a follow-up analysis of 3,882 of the participants 5 years after the end of AREDS2 (during which they took the AREDS2 formulation containing lutein and zeaxanthin instead of beta-carotene), the increased lung cancer risk persisted, with an 82% higher risk among participants who took the supplement containing beta-carotene during the 5-year AREDS2 trial [73].

Three other clinical trials have found no relationship between taking vitamin A or beta-carotene supplements and lung cancer incidence or mortality [74]. One trial randomized 22,071 male physicians age 40–84 years to take 50 mg beta carotene on alternate days or a placebo for 12 years [75]. Eleven percent of the physicians were current smokers, and 38% were former smokers at the start of the study. The results showed no differences between the groups in number of cases of lung cancer or any malignant neoplasms or number of deaths from cancer. Another trial randomized 7,627 women (mean age 60.4 years) to take 50 mg beta-carotene on alternate days, 600 IU vitamin E on alternate days, 500 mg vitamin C daily, or a placebo for a mean of 9.4 years [76]. Fifteen percent of the women were current smokers, and 41% were former smokers at the start of the study. None of the supplements had any significant effect on total cancer incidence or cancer mortality, including from lung cancer. A third trial included 29,584 healthy men and women age 40–69 years who were living in Linxian, China, where micronutrient deficiencies are common [77]. The study randomized participants to take either a placebo or one of four vitamin and mineral combinations (including one providing retinol and zinc and another providing beta carotene, vitamin E, and selenium) for 5.25 years. The investigators followed participants for an additional 10 years after they stopped taking the supplements. The nutrient doses in the supplements were equivalent to or twice as high as U.S. recommended intakes, but the study report did not provide the exact doses. During both the intervention and follow-up periods, lung cancer death rates did not differ among the five groups, even when the investigators further analyzed the results for differences by age, sex, and smoking status.

The CARET and ATBC study results suggest that large supplemental doses of beta-carotene with or without retinyl palmitate have detrimental effects in current or former smokers and workers exposed to asbestos. However, the other studies described above that used similar vitamin A doses but had smaller proportions of current or former smokers do not raise this concern. Among nonsmokers, beta-carotene and vitamin A supplements do not appear to affect the risk of cancer.
Age-related macular degeneration

AMD is the leading cause of significant vision loss in older people [78]. AMD’s etiology involves complex interactions among genetic susceptibility, environmental factors (including exposure to oxidative stress), and normal aging [78]. Because of the role of oxidative stress in AMD pathophysiology, supplements containing carotenoids with antioxidant functions, such as beta-carotene, lutein, and zeaxanthin, might be useful for preventing or treating this condition. Lutein and zeaxanthin (which are not precursors of vitamin A), in particular, accumulate in the retina, the tissue in the eye that is damaged by AMD.

The AREDS trial found that participants with a high risk of developing advanced AMD (i.e., those who had intermediate AMD or who had advanced AMD in one eye) had a 25% lower risk of developing advanced AMD after they took a daily supplement containing beta-carotene (15 mg [7,500 mcg RAE]), vitamin E (180 mg [400 IU] dl-alpha-tocopheryl acetate), vitamin C (500 mg), zinc (80 mg), and copper (2 mg) for 5 years than participants taking a placebo [79].

The follow-up AREDS2 study confirmed the value of this supplement in reducing the progression of AMD over a median follow-up period of 5 years [72]. However, this follow-up study showed that adding lutein (10 mg) and zeaxanthin (2 mg) or omega-3 fatty acids to the formulation produced no additional benefits. Importantly, the follow-up study also revealed that beta-carotene was not a required ingredient; the original AREDS formulation without beta-carotene provided the same protective effect against developing advanced AMD.

In a more detailed analysis, participants with the lowest dietary intakes of lutein and zeaxanthin had a 26% lower risk of advanced AMD when they took a supplement containing these two carotenoids than those who did not take a supplement with these carotenoids [72]. The risk of advanced AMD was also 18% lower in participants who took the modified AREDS supplement containing lutein and zeaxanthin but not beta-carotene than in participants who took the formulation with beta-carotene but not lutein or zeaxanthin.

A subsequent study monitored dietary intakes of several nutrients in 4,504 AREDS participants and 3,738 AREDS2 participants (mean age 71 years) for a median of 10.2 years [80]. Participants in the two highest quintiles of intakes for vitamin A, beta-carotene, or lutein and zeaxanthin had a lower risk of progression to late AMD. For example, the risk of late AMD was 18% lower among those in the fifth quintile for vitamin A intake and 20% lower among those in the fourth quintile than among those in the first quintile.

At the end of the 5-year AREDS2 trial, participants were all offered the final AREDS2 formulation that included lutein and zeaxanthin in place of beta-carotene. Researchers followed up with 3,882 of these participants for an additional 5 years [73]. After 10 years, participants who had taken the AREDS2 supplement with lutein and zeaxanthin had an additional 20% reduced risk of progression to late AMD compared with those who took the supplement containing beta-carotene. This finding confirmed the benefit of replacing beta-carotene with lutein and zeaxanthin.

Individuals who have or are developing AMD should talk to their health care provider about their vitamin A intakes and the supplement formulations used in the AREDS studies.
Measles

In 2023, measles was responsible for about 107,500 deaths worldwide, mostly in young children in low-income countries [81,82]. Vitamin A deficiency, which is rare in the United States, is a risk factor for severe measles [27,83]. A World Health Organization analysis of data from 83 countries showed that 11,200 child deaths from measles were associated with vitamin A deficiency in 2013, and more than 95% of these deaths occurred in sub-Saharan Africa and south Asia [27].

Research suggests that vitamin A supplementation reduces the risk of measles in children who are at high risk of vitamin A deficiency. However, vitamin A supplementation does not appear to reduce the risk of death from measles. A 2022 Cochrane Review included six clinical trials that examined the effect of vitamin A supplementation on the risk of measles in children [84]. These studies enrolled a total of 19,566 children age 6 months to 5 years who lived in low- and middle-income countries. Vitamin A doses ranged from 15,000 mcg RAE (50,000 IU) to 60,000 mcg RAE (200,000 IU), depending on age. Supplements were administered as a single dose or every 4 to 6 months. Vitamin A supplementation reduced the risk of new cases of measles by 50%. However, the same Cochrane Review found that vitamin A supplementation did not affect the risk of death due to measles, based on the results from six clinical trials in a total of 1,088,261 children.
Health Risks from Excessive Vitamin A

Because vitamin A is fat soluble, the body stores excess amounts, primarily in the liver, and these levels can accumulate.

Acute vitamin A toxicity, also referred to as hypervitaminosis A, occurs within days to weeks after someone ingests one or a few very high doses (typically more than 100 times the RDA) [85]. Resulting signs and symptoms typically include severe headache, blurred vision, nausea, dizziness, aching muscles, and coordination problems. In severe cases, cerebral spinal fluid pressure can increase, leading to drowsiness and, eventually, coma and even death [85].

Chronic hypervitaminosis A (regular consumption of high doses) can cause dry skin, painful muscles and joints, fatigue, depression, and abnormal liver test results [85].

Total intakes of preformed vitamin A that exceed the UL as well as some retinoid medications used as topical therapies (such as isotretinoin, used to treat severe acne, and etretinate, a treatment for severe psoriasis) can cause congenital birth defects [1]. These birth defects can include malformations of the eye, skull, lungs, and heart [14]. Experts advise women who are or might be pregnant and those who are lactating not to take high doses (more than 3,000 mcg RAE [10,000 IU] daily) of vitamin A supplements [1].

Unlike preformed vitamin A, beta-carotene is not known to be teratogenic or lead to reproductive toxicity [1]. The most common effect of long-term, excess beta-carotene is carotenodermia, a harmless condition in which the skin becomes yellow-orange [3]. This condition can be reversed by discontinuing beta-carotene ingestion. However, the ATBC trial found that supplementation with a large amount of beta-carotene (20 mg/day), with or without 50 mg/day vitamin E, for 5–8 years increased the risk of lung cancer and mortality (mainly from lung cancer and ischemic heart disease) in male smokers [70]. The CARET trial also showed that supplementation with a large amount of beta-carotene (30 mg/day) plus 7,500 mcg RAE (25,000 IU)/day retinyl palmitate for 4–8 years in current and former smokers as well as some men occupationally exposed to asbestos increased the risk of lung cancer and death from lung cancer [67].

The FNB has not established ULs for beta-carotene and other provitamin A carotenoids [3]. However, the FNB advises against the use of beta-carotene supplements for the general population, except as a provitamin A source to prevent vitamin A deficiency.
Tolerable upper intake levels for preformed vitamin A

The FNB has established ULs for preformed vitamin A that apply to both food and supplement intakes [5]. The FNB based these ULs on the amounts associated with an increased risk of liver abnormalities in men and women, teratogenic effects, and several toxic effects in infants and children.
Table 3: Tolerable Upper Intake Levels (ULs) for Preformed Vitamin A [5]* Age 	Male 	Female 	Pregnancy 	Lactation
Birth to 12 months 	600 mcg 	600 mcg 		
1–3 years 	600 mcg 	600 mcg 		
4–8 years 	900 mcg 	900 mcg 		
9–13 years 	1,700 mcg 	1,700 mcg 		
14–18 years 	2,800 mcg 	2,800 mcg 	2,800 mcg 	2,800 mcg
19+ years 	3,000 mcg 	3,000 mcg 	3,000 mcg 	3,000 mcg

*These ULs apply only to products from animal sources and supplements whose vitamin A comes entirely from retinol or its ester forms, such as retinyl palmitate. However, many dietary supplements (such as multivitamins) do not provide all of their vitamin A in retinol or its ester forms. For example, the vitamin A in some supplements consists partly or entirely of beta-carotene. In such cases, the percentage of retinol or retinyl ester in the supplement should be used to determine whether an individual’s vitamin A intake exceeds the UL. For example, a supplement whose label indicates that the product contains 3,000 mcg RAE vitamin A and that 60% of this vitamin A comes from beta-carotene (and therefore 40% comes from retinol or retinyl ester) provides 1,200 mcg RAE of preformed vitamin A. That amount is above the UL for children from birth to 8 years but below the UL for older children and adults.
Interactions with Medications

Vitamin A has the potential to interact with certain medications. In addition, several types of medications might adversely affect vitamin A levels. A few examples are provided below. Individuals taking these and other medications on a regular basis should discuss their vitamin A status with their health care providers.

Orlistat (Alli, Xenical), a weight-loss treatment, can decrease the absorption of vitamin A, other fat-soluble vitamins, and beta-carotene, resulting in low plasma levels in some patients [86,87]. The manufacturers of Alli and Xenical recommend that patients on orlistat take a multivitamin supplement containing vitamin A and beta-carotene as well as other fat-soluble vitamins [88,89].
Retinoids

Several synthetic retinoids derived from vitamin A are used orally as prescription medicines. Examples include the psoriasis treatment acitretin (Soriatane) and bexarotene (Targretin), used to treat the skin effects of T-cell lymphoma. Retinoids can increase the risk of hypervitaminosis A when taken in combination with vitamin A supplements [87].
Vitamin A and Healthful Diets

The federal government’s 2020–2025 Dietary Guidelines for Americans notes that "Because foods provide an array of nutrients and other components that have benefits for health, nutritional needs should be met primarily through foods. ... In some cases, fortified foods and dietary supplements are useful when it is not possible otherwise to meet needs for one or more nutrients (e.g., during specific life stages such as pregnancy)."

For more information about building a healthy dietary pattern, refer to the Dietary Guidelines for Americans and the USDA's MyPlate.

The Dietary Guidelines for Americans describes a healthy eating pattern as one that

    Includes a variety of vegetables, fruits, whole grains, fat-free or low-fat milk and milk products, and oils.
        Many fruits, vegetables, and dairy products are good sources of vitamin A. Some ready-to-eat breakfast cereals are fortified with vitamin A.
    Includes a variety of protein foods, including seafood, lean meats and poultry, eggs, legumes (beans and peas), nuts, seeds, and soy products.
        Beef liver contains high amounts of vitamin A. Other sources of the nutrient include eggs and some fish.
    Limits foods and beverages higher in added sugars, saturated fat, and sodium.
    Limits alcoholic beverages.
    Stays within your daily calorie needs.

References

    Blaner WS. Vitamin A and Provitamin A Carotenoids. In: Marriott BP, Birt DF, Stallings VA, Yates AA, eds. Present Knowledge in Nutrition. 11th ed. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Wiley-Blackwell; 2020:73-91.
    Ross A. Vitamin A. In: Ross AC, Caballero B, Cousins RJ, Tucker KL, Ziegler TR, eds. Modern Nutrition in Health and Disease. 11th ed. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2014:260-77.
    Institute of Medicine. Food and Nutrition Board. Dietary Reference Intakes for Vitamin C, Vitamin E, Selenium, and Carotenoids. Washington, DC: National Academy Press; 2000.
    Carazo A, Macakova K, Matousova K, Krcmova LK, Protti M, Mladenka P. Vitamin A update: Forms, sources, kinetics, detection, function, deficiency, therapeutic use and toxicity. Nutrients 2021;13:1703. [PubMed abstract]
    Institute of Medicine. Food and Nutrition Board. Dietary Reference Intakes for Vitamin A, Vitamin K, Arsenic, Boron, Chromium, Copper, Iodine, Iron, Manganese, Molybdenum, Nickel, Silicon, Vanadium, and Zinc. Washington, DC: National Academy Press; 2001.
    Kedishvili NY. Enzymology of retinoic acid biosynthesis and degradation. J Lipid Res. 2013 Jul;54(7):1744-60.  [PubMed abstract]
    Zumaraga MPP, Arquiza JMRA, Concepcion MA, Perlas L, Alcudia-Catalma MN, Rodriguez M. Genotype Effects on β-Carotene Conversion to Vitamin A: Implications on Reducing Vitamin A Deficiency in the Philippines. Food Nutr Bull. 2022 Mar;43(1):25-34. [PubMed abstract]
    Lietz G, Oxley A, Leung W, Hesketh J. Single nucleotide polymorphisms upstream from the β-carotene 15,15'-monoxygenase gene influence provitamin A conversion efficiency in female volunteers. J Nutr. 2012 Jan;142(1):161S-5S. [PubMed abstract]
    Leung WC, Hessel S, Méplan C, Flint J, Oberhauser V, Tourniaire F, Hesketh JE, von Lintig J, Lietz G. Two common single nucleotide polymorphisms in the gene encoding beta-carotene 15,15'-monoxygenase alter beta-carotene metabolism in female volunteers. FASEB J. 2009 Apr;23(4):1041-53. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Food Labeling: Revision of the Nutrition and Supplement Facts Labels. 2016.
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Food Labeling: Revision of the Nutrition and Supplement Facts Labels and Serving Sizes of Foods That Can Reasonably Be Consumed at One Eating Occasion; Dual-Column Labeling; Updating, Modifying, and Establishing Certain Reference Amounts Customarily Consumed; Serving Size for Breath Mints; and Technical Amendments; Proposed Extension of Compliance Dates. 2017.
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Converting Units of Measure for Folate, Niacin, and Vitamins A, D, and E on the Nutrition and Supplement Facts Labels: Guidance for Industry. 2019.
    Dwyer J, Saldanha L, Haggans C, Potischman N, Gahche J, Thomas P, et al. Conversions of β-carotene as vitamin A in IU to vitamin A in RAE. J Nutr 2020;150:1337. [PubMed abstract]
    Solomons NW. Vitamin A. In: Bowman B, Russell R, eds. Present Knowledge in Nutrition. 9th ed. Washington, DC: International Life Sciences Institute; 2006:157-83.
    Van Loo-Bouwman CA, Naber TH, Schaafsma G. A review of vitamin A equivalency of beta-carotene in various food matrices for human consumption. Br J Nutr 2014;111:2153-66. [PubMed abstract]
    Berner LA, Keast DR, Bailey RL, Dwyer JT. Fortified foods are major contributors to nutrient intakes in diets of US children and adolescents. J Acad Nutr Diet 2014;114:1009-22.e8. [PubMed abstract]
    Reboul E. Absorption of vitamin A and carotenoids by the enterocyte: focus on transport proteins. Nutrients 2013;5:3563-81. [PubMed abstract]
    Reboul E. Mechanisms of carotenoid intestinal absorption: where do we stand? Nutrients 2019;11:838. [PubMed abstract]
    Tanumihardjo SA, Russell RM, Stephensen CB, Gannon BM, Craft NE, Haskell MJ, et al. Biomarkers of Nutrition for Development (BOND)-Vitamin A review. J Nutr 2016;146:1816S-48S. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Department of Agriculture. FoodData Central. 2021.
    Office of Dietary Supplements, National Institutes of Health. Dietary Supplement Label Database. 2021.
    Haskell MJ. The challenge to reach nutritional adequacy for vitamin A: beta-carotene bioavailability and conversion--evidence in humans. Am J Clin Nutr 2012;96:1193s-203s. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service. What We Eat in America, 2017-2018. 2021.
    Bird JK, Murphy RA, Ciappio ED, McBurney MI. Risk of deficiency in multiple concurrent micronutrients in children and adults in the United States. Nutrients 2017;9: 655. [PubMed abstract]
    Bailey RL, Gahche JJ, Lentino CV, Dwyer JT, Engel JS, Thomas PR, et al. Dietary supplement use in the United States, 2003-2006. J Nutr 2011;141:261-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Wiseman EM, Bar-El Dadon S, Reifen R. The vicious cycle of vitamin a deficiency: A review. Crit Rev Food Sci Nutr 2017;57:3703-14. [PubMed abstract]
    Stevens GA, Bennett JE, Hennocq Q, Lu Y, De-Regil LM, Rogers L, et al. Trends and mortality effects of vitamin A deficiency in children in 138 low-income and middle-income countries between 1991 and 2013: a pooled analysis of population-based surveys. Lancet Glob Health 2015;3:e528-36. [PubMed abstract]
    Bailey RL, West KP, Jr., Black RE. The epidemiology of global micronutrient deficiencies. Ann Nutr Metab 2015;66 Suppl 2:22-33. [PubMed abstract]
    Timoneda J, Rodriguez-Fernandez L, Zaragoza R, Marin MP, Cabezuelo MT, Torres L, et al. Vitamin A deficiency and the lung. Nutrients 2018;10:1132. [PubMed abstract]
    Schwartz E, Zelig R, Parker A, Johnson S. Vitamin A supplementation for the prevention of bronchopulmonary dysplasia in preterm infants: an update. Nutr Clin Pract 2017;32:346-53. [PubMed abstract]
    Darlow BA, Graham PJ. Vitamin A supplementation to prevent mortality and short and long-term morbidity in very low birthweight infants. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2007:CD000501. [PubMed abstract]
    Rakshasbhuvankar A, Patole S, Simmer K, Pillow JJ. Enteral vitamin A for reducing severity of bronchopulmonary dysplasia in extremely preterm infants: a randomised controlled trial. BMC Pediatr 2017;17:204. [PubMed abstract]
    Sun H, Cheng R, Wang Z. Early vitamin A supplementation improves the outcome of retinopathy of prematurity in extermely premature infants. Retina 2020;40:1176-84. [PubMed abstract]
    Mactier H, Weaver LT. Vitamin A and preterm infants: what we know, what we don't know, and what we need to know. Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed 2005;90:F103-8. [PubMed abstract]
    McCauley ME, van den Broek N, Dou L, Othman M. Vitamin A supplementation during pregnancy for maternal and newborn outcomes. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2015:Cd008666. [PubMed abstract]
    Haider BA, Sharma R, Bhutta ZA. Neonatal vitamin A supplementation for the prevention of mortality and morbidity in term neonates in low and middle income countries. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2017;2:Cd006980. [PubMed abstract]
    Ota E, da Silva Lopes K, Middleton P, Flenady V, Wariki WM, Rahman MO, et al. Antenatal interventions for preventing stillbirth, fetal loss and perinatal death: an overview of Cochrane systematic reviews. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2020;12:Cd009599. [PubMed abstract]
    Oliveira JM, Allert R, East CE. Vitamin A supplementation for postpartum women. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2016;3:Cd005944. [PubMed abstract]
    World Health Organization. Guideline: Vitamin A Supplementation in Infants and Children 6-59 Months of Age. 2011.
    World Health Organization. Global Prevalence of Vitamin A Deficiency in Populations at Risk 1995–2005: WHO Gobal Database on Vitamin A Deficiency. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2009.
    de Vries JJ, Chang AB, Bonifant CM, Shevill E, Marchant JM. Vitamin A and beta (beta)-carotene supplementation for cystic fibrosis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2018;8:Cd006751. [PubMed abstract]
    Rana M, Wong-See D, Katz T, Gaskin K, Whitehead B, Jaffe A, et al. Fat-soluble vitamin deficiency in children and adolescents with cystic fibrosis. J Clin Pathol 2014;67:605-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Woestenenk JW, Broos N, Stellato RK, Arets HG, van der Ent CK, Houwen RH. Vitamin A intake and serum retinol levels in children and adolescents with cystic fibrosis. Clin Nutr 2016;35:654-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Fabisiak N, Fabisiak A, Watala C, Fichna J. Fat-soluble vitamin deficiencies and inflammatory bowel disease: systematic review and meta-analysis. J Clin Gastroenterol 2017;51:878-89. [PubMed abstract]
    Rempel J, Grover K, El-Matary W. Micronutrient deficiencies and anemia in children with inflammatory bowel disease. Nutrients 2021;13:236. [PubMed abstract]
    Santucci NR, Alkhouri RH, Baker RD, Baker SS. Vitamin and zinc status pretreatment and posttreatment in patients with inflammatory bowel disease. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr 2014;59:455-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Wright JP, Mee AS, Parfitt A, Marks IN, Burns DG, Sherman M, et al. Vitamin A therapy in patients with Crohn's disease. Gastroenterology 1985;88:512-4. [PubMed abstract]
    Tokgöz Y, Terlemez S, Karul A. Fat soluble vitamin levels in children with newly diagnosed celiac disease, a case control study. BMC Pediatr 2018;18:130. [PubMed abstract]
    Wierdsma NJ, van Bokhorst-de van der Schueren MAE, Berkenpas M, Mulder CJJ, van Bodegraven AA. Vitamin and mineral deficiencies are highly prevalent in newly diagnosed celiac disease patients. Nutrients 2013;5:3975-92. [PubMed abstract]
    McGrogan L, Mackinder M, Stefanowicz F, Aroutiounova M, Catchpole A, Wadsworth J, et al. Micronutrient deficiencies in children with coeliac disease; a double-edged sword of both untreated disease and treatment with gluten-free diet. Clin Nutr 2021;40:2784-90. [PubMed abstract]
    Shepherd SJ, Gibson PR. Nutritional inadequacies of the gluten-free diet in both recently-diagnosed and long-term patients with coeliac disease. J Hum Nutr Diet 2013;26:349-58. [PubMed abstract]
    Wang ZY, Chen Z. Acute promyelocytic leukemia: from highly fatal to highly curable. Blood 2008;111:2505-15. [PubMed abstract]
    Lo-Coco F, Avvisati G, Vignetti M, Thiede C, Orlando SM, Iacobelli S, et al. Retinoic acid and arsenic trioxide for acute promyelocytic leukemia. N Engl J Med 2013;369:111-21. [PubMed abstract]
    Rowles JL, 3rd, Ranard KM, Smith JW, An R, Erdman JW, Jr. Increased dietary and circulating lycopene are associated with reduced prostate cancer risk: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Prostate Cancer Prostatic Dis 2017;20:361-77. [PubMed abstract]
    Chen F, Hu J, Liu P, Li J, Wei Z, Liu P. Carotenoid intake and risk of non-Hodgkin lymphoma: a systematic review and dose-response meta-analysis of observational studies. Ann Hematol 2017;96:957-65. [PubMed abstract]
    Chen J, Jiang W, Shao L, Zhong D, Wu Y, Cai J. Association between intake of antioxidants and pancreatic cancer risk: a meta-analysis. International Journal of Food Sciences and Nutrition 2016;67:744-53. [PubMed abstract]
    Leoncini E, Nedovic D, Panic N, Pastorino R, Edefonti V, Boccia S. Carotenoid intake from natural sources and head and neck cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis of epidemiological studies. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2015;24:1003-11. [PubMed abstract]
    Li H, He P, Lin T, Guo H, Li Y, Song Y, et al. Association between plasma retinol levels and the risk of all-cause mortality in general hypertensive patients: A nested case-control study. J Clin Hypertens (Greenwich) 2020;22:906-13. [PubMed abstract]
    Li X, Xu J. Meta-analysis of the association between dietary lycopene intake and ovarian cancer risk in postmenopausal women. Scientific reports 2014;4:4885. [PubMed abstract]
    Wang Q, He C. Dietary vitamin A intake and the risk of ovarian cancer: a meta-analysis. Biosci Rep 2020;40. [PubMed abstract]
    Lv W, Zhong X, Xu L, Han W. Association between dietary vitamin A Intake and the risk of glioma: evidence from a meta-analysis. Nutrients 2015;7:8897-904. [PubMed abstract]
    Tang JE, Wang RJ, Zhong H, Yu B, Chen Y. Vitamin A and risk of bladder cancer: a meta-analysis of epidemiological studies. World J Surg Oncol 2014;12:130. [PubMed abstract]
    Leelakanok N, D'Cunha RR, Sutamtewagul G, Schweizer ML. A systematic review and meta-analysis of the association between vitamin A intake, serum vitamin A, and risk of liver cancer. Nutr Health 2018;24:121-31. [PubMed abstract]
    Psaltopoulou T, Ntanasis-Stathopoulos I, Tsilimigras DI, Tzanninis IG, Gavriatopoulou M, Sergentanis TN. Micronutrient intake and risk of hematological malignancies in adults: a systematic review and meta-analysis of cohort studies. Nutr Cancer 2018;70:821-39. [PubMed abstract]
    Wang X, Yang H-H, Liu Y, Zhou Q, Chen Z-H. Lycopene consumption and risk of colorectal cancer: a meta-analysis of observational studies. Nutrition and Cancer 2016;68:1083-96. [PubMed abstract]
    Aune D, Keum N, Giovannucci E, Fadnes LT, Boffetta P, Greenwood DC, et al. Dietary intake and blood concentrations of antioxidants and the risk of cardiovascular disease, total cancer, and all-cause mortality: a systematic review and dose-response meta-analysis of prospective studies. Am J Clin Nutr 2018;108:1069-91. [PubMed abstract]
    Omenn GS, Goodman GE, Thornquist MD, Balmes J, Cullen MR, Glass A, et al. Effects of a combination of beta carotene and vitamin A on lung cancer and cardiovascular disease. N Engl J Med 1996;334:1150-5. [PubMed abstract]
    Goodman GE, Thornquist MD, Balmes J, Cullen MR, Meyskens FL, Omenn GS, et al. The beta-carotene and retinol efficacy trial: incidence of lung cancer and cardiovascular disease mortality during 6-year follow-up after stopping β-carotene and retinol supplements. J Natl Cancer Inst 2004;96:1743-50. [PubMed abstract]
    Neuhouser ML, Barnett MJ, Kristal AR, Ambrosone CB, King IB, Thornquist M, et al. Dietary supplement use and prostate cancer risk in the Carotene and Retinol Efficacy Trial. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2009;18:2202-6. [PubMed abstract]
    The Alpha-Tocopherol, Beta-Carotene Cancer Prevention Study Group. The effect of vitamin E and beta carotene on the incidence of lung cancer and other cancers in male smokers. N Engl J Med 1994;330:1029-35. [PubMed abstract]
    Virtamo J, Taylor PR, Kontto J, Männistö S, Utriainen M, Weinstein SJ, et al. Effects of α-tocopherol and β-carotene supplementation on cancer incidence and mortality: 18-year postintervention follow-up of the Alpha-tocopherol, Beta-carotene Cancer Prevention Study. International journal of cancer 2014;135:178-85. [PubMed abstract]
    Age-Related Eye Disease Study 2 Research Group. Lutein + zeaxanthin and omega-3 fatty acids for age-related macular degeneration: the Age-Related Eye Disease Study 2 (AREDS2) randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2013;309:2005-15. [PubMed abstract]
    Chew EY, Clemons TE, Agron E, Domalpally A, Keenan TDL, Vitale S, Weber C, Smith DC, Christen W, for the AREDS2 Research group. Long-term outcomes of adding Lutein/Zeaxanthin and Omega-3 Fatty Acids to the AREDS Supplements on Age-Related Macular Degeneration Progression: AREDS2 Report #28. JAMA Ophthalmology. June 2, 2022. [PubMed abstract]
    Cortes-Jofre M, Rueda JR, Asenjo-Lobos C, Madrid E, Bonfill Cosp X. Drugs for preventing lung cancer in healthy people. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2020;3:Cd002141. [PubMed abstract]
    Hennekens CH, Buring JE, Manson JE, Stampfer M, Rosner B, Cook NR, et al. Lack of effect of long-term supplementation with beta carotene on the incidence of malignant neoplasms and cardiovascular disease. The New England journal of medicine 1996;334:1145-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Lin J, Cook NR, Albert C, Zaharris E, Gaziano JM, Van Denburgh M, et al. Vitamins C and E and beta carotene supplementation and cancer risk: a randomized controlled trial. J Natl Cancer Inst 2009;101:14-23. [PubMed abstract]
    Kamangar F, Qiao YL, Yu B, Sun XD, Abnet CC, Fan JH, et al. Lung cancer chemoprevention: a randomized, double-blind trial in Linxian, China. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2006;15:1562-4. [PubMed abstract]
    Fleckenstein M, Keenan TDL, Guymer RH, Chakravarthy U, Schmitz-Valckenberg S, Klaver CC, et al. Age-related macular degeneration. Nat Rev Dis Primers 2021;7:31. [PubMed abstract]
    Age-Related Eye Disease Study Research Group. A randomized, placebo-controlled, clinical trial of high-dose supplementation with vitamins C and E, beta carotene, and zinc for age-related macular degeneration and vision loss: AREDS report no. 8. Arch Ophthalmol 2001;119:1417-36. [PubMed abstract]
    Agron E, Mares J, Clemons TE, Swaroop A, Chew EY, Keenan TDL. Dietary nutrient intake and progression to late age-related macular degeneration in the Age-Related Eye Disease Studies 1 and 2. Ophthalmology 2021;128:425-42. [PubMed abstract]
    Minta AA, Ferrari M, Antoni S, Lambert B, Sayi TS, et al. Progress Toward Measles Elimination - Worldwide, 2000-2023. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2024;73:1036-42. [PubMed abstract]
    World Health Organization. Measles. 2024.
    Haggerty PA. Medical Nutrition Therapy for Infectious Diseases. In: Raymond JL, Morrow K, eds. Krause and Mahan's Food and the Nutrition Care Process, 16th Edition: Elsevier; 2022.
    Imdad A, Mayo-Wilson E, Haykal MR, Regan A, Sidhu J, et al. Vitamin A supplementation for preventing morbidity and mortality in children from six months to five years of age. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2022;3:Cd008524. [PubMed abstract]
    National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. LiverTox: Clinical and research information on drug-induced liver injury. 2020.
    Zhi J, Melia AT, Koss-Twardy SG, Arora S, Patel IH. The effect of orlistat, an inhibitor of dietary fat absorption, on the pharmacokinetics of beta-carotene in healthy volunteers. J Clin Pharmacol 1996;36:152-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Ulbricht C, Basch E, Chao W, Conquer J, Costa D, Culwell S, et al. An evidence-based systematic review of vitamin A by the natural standard research collaboration. J Diet Suppl 2012;9:299-416. [PubMed abstract]
    Genentech USA, Inc. Xenical Package Insert. 2017.
    GlaxoSmithKline. Alli Package Insert. 2017.

Disclaimer

This fact sheet by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Office of Dietary Supplements (ODS) provides information that should not take the place of medical advice. We encourage you to talk to your health care providers (doctor, registered dietitian, pharmacist, etc.) about your interest in, questions about, or use of dietary supplements and what may be best for your overall health. Any mention in this publication of a specific product or service, or recommendation from an organization or professional society, does not represent an endorsement by ODS of that product, service, or expert advice.

Updated: March 10, 2025


 Vitamin B12: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals (original version)
Vitamin B12: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals
Table of Contents

    Introduction
    Recommended Intakes
    Sources of Vitamin B12
    Vitamin B12 Intakes and Status
    Vitamin B12 Deficiency
    Groups at Risk of Vitamin B12 Inadequacy
    Vitamin B12 and Health
    Health Risks from Excessive Vitamin B12
    Interactions with Medications
    Vitamin B12 and Healthful Diets
    References
    Disclaimer

Introduction

Vitamin B12 is a water-soluble vitamin that is naturally present in some foods, added to others, and available as a dietary supplement and a prescription medication. Because vitamin B12 contains the mineral cobalt, compounds with vitamin B12 activity are collectively called cobalamins [1]. Methylcobalamin and 5-deoxyadenosylcobalamin are the metabolically active forms of vitamin B12. However, two others forms, hydroxycobalamin and cyanocobalamin, become biologically active after they are converted to methylcobalamin or 5-deoxyadenosylcobalamin [1-3].

Vitamin B12 is required for the development, myelination, and function of the central nervous system; healthy red blood cell formation; and DNA synthesis [1,4,5]. Vitamin B12 functions as a cofactor for two enzymes, methionine synthase and L-methylmalonyl-CoA mutase [1-3,5]. Methionine synthase catalyzes the conversion of homocysteine to the essential amino acid methionine [1,2]. Methionine is required for the formation of S-adenosylmethionine, a universal methyl donor for almost 100 different substrates, including DNA, RNA, proteins, and lipids [3,5]. L-methylmalonyl-CoA mutase converts L-methylmalonyl-CoA to succinyl-CoA in the metabolism of propionate, a short-chain fatty acid [2].

Vitamin B12 is bound to protein in food and must be released before it is absorbed [5]. The process starts in the mouth when food is mixed with saliva. The freed vitamin B12 then binds with haptocorrin, a cobalamin-binding protein in the saliva. More vitamin B12 is released from its food matrix by the activity of hydrochloric acid and gastric protease in the stomach, where it then binds to haptocorrin [1]. In the duodenum, digestive enzymes free the vitamin B12 from haptocorrin, and this freed vitamin B12 combines with intrinsic factor, a transport and delivery binding protein secreted by the stomach’s parietal cells. The resulting complex is absorbed in the distal ileum by receptor-mediated endocytosis [1,5]. If vitamin B12 is added to fortified foods and dietary supplements, it is already in free form and therefore does not require the separation step.
Assessing Vitamin B12 Status

Serum or plasma vitamin B12 levels are typically used to assess a person’s vitamin B12 status, with values lower than 200 or 250 pg/mL generally being considered subnormal. The most sensitive marker of vitamin B12 status is a vitamin B12-associated metabolite called methylmalonic acid, and serum levels of this metabolite can be used to confirm a diagnosis of vitamin B12 deficiency if a patient’s serum vitamin B12 level is between 150 and 399 pg/mL.

Vitamin B12 status is typically assessed by measurements of serum or plasma vitamin B12 levels. The cutoff between normal vitamin B12 levels and deficiency varies by method and laboratory, but most laboratories define subnormal serum or plasma values as those lower than 200 or 250 picograms per milliliter (pg/mL) (148 or 185 picomols per liter [pmol/L]) [2]. Levels of serum methylmalonic acid (MMA), a vitamin B12-associated metabolite, are the most sensitive markers of vitamin B12 status, and an MMA level greater than 0.271 micromol/L suggests vitamin B12 deficiency [6-8]. However, MMA levels also rise with renal insufficiency and tend to be higher in older adults [6,9,10]. Another marker is total plasma homocysteine levels, which rise quickly as vitamin B12 status declines; a serum homocysteine level higher than 15 micromol/L, for example, suggests vitamin B12 deficiency [11]. However, this indicator has poor specificity because it is influenced by other factors, such as low folate levels and, especially, by declines in kidney function [6]. Experts suggest that if a patient’s serum vitamin B12 level is between 150 to 399 pg/mL (111 to 294 pmol/L), the patient’s serum MMA levels should be checked to help confirm a diagnosis of vitamin B12 deficiency [7,9].
Recommended Intakes

The Food and Nutrition Board at the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine has established Recommended Dietary Allowances and Adequate Intakes for vitamin B12. These values range from 2.4 to 2.8 mcg for adults and from 0.4 to 2.8 mcg for infants, children, and adolescents, depending on age.

Intake recommendations for vitamin B12 and other nutrients are provided in the Dietary Reference Intakes (DRIs) developed by the Food and Nutrition Board (FNB) at the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine [1]. DRI is the general term for a set of reference values used for planning and assessing nutrient intakes of healthy people. These values, which vary by age and sex, include the following:

    Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA): Average daily level of intake sufficient to meet the nutrient requirements of nearly all (97%–98%) healthy individuals; often used to plan nutritionally adequate diets for individuals
    Adequate Intake (AI): Intake at this level is assumed to ensure nutritional adequacy; established when evidence is insufficient to develop an RDA
    Estimated Average Requirement (EAR): Average daily level of intake estimated to meet the requirements of 50% of healthy individuals; usually used to assess the nutrient intakes of groups of people and to plan nutritionally adequate diets for them; can also be used to assess the nutrient intakes of individuals
    Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL): Maximum daily intake unlikely to cause adverse health effects

Table 1 lists the current RDAs for vitamin B12 [1]. For adults, the main criterion that the FNB used to establish the RDAs was the amount needed to maintain a healthy hematological status and serum vitamin B12 levels. For infants age 0 to 12 months, the FNB established an AI that is equivalent to the mean intake of vitamin B12 in healthy, breastfed infants.
Table 1: Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDAs) for Vitamin B12 in Micrograms (mcg)[1] Age 	Male 	Female 	Pregnancy 	Lactation
Birth to 6 months* 	0.4 mcg 	0.4 mcg 		
7–12 months* 	0.5 mcg 	0.5 mcg 		
1–3 years 	0.9 mcg 	0.9 mcg 		
4–8 years 	1.2 mcg 	1.2 mcg 		
9–13 years 	1.8 mcg 	1.8 mcg 		
14–18 years 	2.4 mcg 	2.4 mcg 	2.6 mcg 	2.8 mcg
19+ years 	2.4 mcg 	2.4 mcg 	2.6 mcg 	2.8 mcg
* Adequate Intake (AI)
Sources of Vitamin B12
Food

Vitamin B12 is found in foods of animal origin. It is not naturally present in plant foods, but some plant foods are fortified with vitamin B12, including many breakfast cereals and nutritional yeasts. Breast milk also contains a small amount of vitamin B12. The bioavailability of vitamin B12 from food varies by vitamin B12 dose and by the type of food source.

Vitamin B12 is present in foods of animal origin, including fish, meat, poultry, eggs, and dairy products [5,12].

Plant foods do not naturally contain vitamin B12. However, fortified breakfast cereals and fortified nutritional yeasts are readily available sources of vitamin B12 that have high bioavailability [13,14].

The average vitamin B12 level in the breast milk of women with vitamin B12 intakes above the RDA is 0.44 micrograms (mcg)/L [15]. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) specifies that infant formulas sold in the United States must provide at least 0.15 mcg vitamin B12 per 100 kcal [16].

The estimated bioavailability of vitamin B12 from food varies by vitamin B12 dose because absorption decreases drastically when the capacity of intrinsic factor is exceeded (at 1–2 mcg of vitamin B12) [17]. Bioavailability also varies by type of food source. For example, the bioavailability of vitamin B12 appears to be about three times higher in dairy products than in meat, fish, and poultry, and the bioavailability of vitamin B12 from dietary supplements is about 50% higher than that from food sources [18-20].

A variety of foods and their vitamin B12 levels per serving are listed in Table 2.
Table 2: Vitamin B12 Content of Selected Foods [21] Food 	Micrograms (mcg)
per serving 	Percent
Daily Value (DV)*
Beef liver, cooked, pan fried, 3 ounces 	70.7 	2,944
Clams (without shells), cooked, 3 ounces 	17 	708
Oysters, eastern, wild, cooked, 3 ounces 	14.9 	621
Nutritional yeast, fortified, from several brands (check label), about ¼ cup 	8.3 to 24 	346 to 1,000
Salmon, Atlantic, cooked, 3 ounces 	2.6 	108
Tuna, light, canned in water, 3 ounces 	2.5 	104
Beef, ground, 85% lean meat/15% fat, pan browned, 3 ounces 	2.4 	100
Milk, 2% milkfat, 1 cup 	1.3 	54
Yogurt, plain, fat free, 6-ounce container 	1.0 	43
Breakfast cereals, fortified with 25% of the DV for vitamin B12, 1 serving 	0.6 	25
Cheese, cheddar, 1½ ounces 	0.5 	19
Egg, whole, cooked, 1 large 	0.5 	19
Turkey, breast meat, roasted, 3 ounces 	0.3 	14
Tempeh, 1/2 cup 	0.1 	3
Banana, 1 medium 	0.0 	0
Bread, whole wheat, 1 slice 	0.0 	0
Strawberries, raw, halved, 1/2 cup 	0.0 	0
Beans, kidney, boiled, 1/2 cup 	0.0 	0
Spinach, boiled, drained, 1/2 cup 	0.0 	0
* FDA developed DVs to help consumers compare the nutrient contents of foods and dietary supplements within the context of a total diet. The DV for vitamin B12 is 2.4 mcg for adults and children age 4 years and older [22]. FDA does not require food labels to list vitamin B12 content unless vitamin B12 has been added to the food. Foods providing 20% or more of the DV are considered to be high sources of a nutrient, but foods providing lower percentages of the DV also contribute to a healthful diet.

The U.S. Department of Agriculture’s (USDA's) FoodData Central [21] lists the nutrient content of many foods and provides a comprehensive list of foods containing vitamin B12 arranged by nutrient content and by food name.
Dietary supplements

Vitamin B12 is present in many dietary supplements, often as cyanocobalamin, but other forms may also be used. Supplements that only contain vitamin B12 typically have the highest doses of the vitamin, while multivitamin/mineral supplements and supplements that combine vitamin B12 with other B-complex vitamins usually contain lower doses.

Vitamin B12 is available in multivitamin/mineral supplements, in supplements containing other B-complex vitamins, and in supplements containing only vitamin B12. Multivitamin/mineral supplements typically contain vitamin B12 at doses ranging from 5 to 25 mcg [23]. Vitamin B12 levels are higher, generally 50 to 500 mcg, in supplements containing vitamin B12 with other B-complex vitamins and even higher, typically 500 to 1,000 mcg, in supplements containing only vitamin B12.

The most common form of vitamin B12 in dietary supplements is cyanocobalamin [1,3,23,24]. Other forms of vitamin B12 in supplements are adenosylcobalamin, methylcobalamin, and hydroxycobalamin [23].

No evidence indicates that absorption rates of vitamin B12 in supplements vary by form of the vitamin. These rates are about 50% at doses (less than 1–2 mcg) that do not exceed the cobalamin-binding capacity of intrinsic factor and are substantially lower at doses well above 1 to 2 mcg [24,25]. For example, absorption is only about 2% at doses of 500 mcg and 1.3% at doses of 1,000 mcg [25].

In addition to oral dietary supplements, vitamin B12 is available in sublingual preparations as tablets or lozenges [23]. Evidence suggests no difference in efficacy between oral and sublingual forms [26,27].
Prescription medications

Certain forms of vitamin B12 are available as prescription medications. These are generally used to treat vitamin B12 deficiency.

Vitamin B12, in the forms of cyanocobalamin and hydroxycobalamin, can be administered parenterally as a prescription medication, usually by intramuscular injection [2]. Parenteral administration is typically used to treat vitamin B12 deficiency caused by pernicious anemia as well as other conditions (e.g., tropical sprue, pancreatic insufficiency) that result in vitamin B12 malabsorption and severe vitamin B12 deficiency [5].

Vitamin B12 is also available as a prescription nasal gel spray. This formulation appears to be effective in raising vitamin B12 blood levels in adults and children [28,29]. A small clinical study with 10 participants (mean age 81 years) found that the bioavailability of a 1,000 mcg cobalamin dose was 2% with intranasal administration, which is similar to the bioavailability of an oral dose [30].
Vitamin B12 Intakes and Status

According to data from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, most people in the United States have sufficient intakes of vitamin B12. 

Most people in the United States consume adequate amounts of vitamin B12. Data from the 2017–March 2020 National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) show that mean daily intakes of vitamin B12 from food and beverages were 5.84 mcg for men age 20 and older and 3.69 mcg for women [31]. For children and adolescents age 2 to 19, mean daily intakes of vitamin B12 ranged from 3.66 mcg to 4.52 mcg [31]. Only 5% of U.S. men and 11% of women had intakes from food and beverages below the vitamin B12 EAR of 2 mcg [32]. People of low socioeconomic status, women, and non-Hispanic Blacks are most likely to have low vitamin B12 intakes [33].

Approximately 24% of men and 29% of women reported using a dietary supplement containing vitamin B12 in NHANES 2017–March 2020 [32]. The proportion in children and adolescents ranged from 28% of those age 2 to 5 years to 9% of those age 12 to 19. Mean daily vitamin B12 intakes among supplement users from food, beverages, and supplements were 297.3 mcg for men age 20 and older, 407.4 mcg for women, and from 24.7 to 47.4 mcg for children and adolescents.

According to an analysis of NHANES data from 2007–2018, approximately 3.6% of all adults age 19 and older have vitamin B12 deficiency (assessed as serum vitamin B12 <200 pg/mL [148 pmol/L]), and the rate is 3.7% in those age 60 and older [34]. However, vitamin B12 insufficiency (assessed as serum vitamin B12 <300 pg/mL [221 pmol/L]) is more prevalent, affecting approximately 12.5% of all adults age 19 and older, and 12.3% of those age 60 and older [34]. During pregnancy, serum vitamin B12 levels tend to drop, sometimes to subnormal levels, but they usually return to normal after delivery [35].
Vitamin B12 Deficiency

Even people who have sufficient intakes of vitamin B12 may have vitamin B12 deficiency, due to factors such as difficulty absorbing the vitamin from food, lack of intrinsic factor due to pernicious anemia, or the prolonged use of certain medications. Vitamin B12 deficiency can cause a number of symptoms, including fatigue, neurological changes, megaloblastic anemia, glossitis of the tongue, palpitations, and low counts of white and red blood cells. The symptoms of vitamin B12 deficiency can take several years to appear.

Causes of vitamin B12 deficiency include difficulty absorbing vitamin B12 from food, lack of intrinsic factor (e.g., because of pernicious anemia), surgery in the gastrointestinal tract, prolonged use of certain medications (e.g., metformin or proton pump inhibitors, discussed in more detail below in the section on interactions with medications), and dietary deficiency [5,7]. Because people who have difficulty absorbing vitamin B12 from food absorb free vitamin B12 normally, their vitamin B12 deficiency tends to be less severe than that of individuals with pernicious anemia, who cannot absorb either food-bound or free vitamin B12. Certain congenital conditions, such as hereditary intrinsic factor defects and congenital vitamin B12 malabsorption (Imerslund-Gräsbeck disease), can also cause severe vitamin B12 deficiency [5].

The effects of vitamin B12 deficiency can include the hallmark megaloblastic anemia (characterized by large, abnormally nucleated red blood cells) as well as low counts of white and red blood cells, platelets, or a combination; glossitis of the tongue; fatigue; palpitations; pale skin; dementia; weight loss; and infertility [2,5,7]. Neurological changes, such as numbness and tingling in the hands and feet, can also occur [7]. These neurological symptoms can occur without anemia, so early diagnosis and intervention is important to avoid irreversible damage [36]. In addition, some studies have found associations between vitamin B12 deficiency or low vitamin B12 intakes and depression [37-39]. In pregnant and breastfeeding women, vitamin B12 deficiency might cause neural tube defects, developmental delays, failure to thrive, and anemia in offspring [7].

Because the body stores about 1 to 5 milligrams (mg) vitamin B12 (or about 1,000 to 2,000 times as much as the amount typically consumed in a day), the symptoms of vitamin B12 deficiency can take several years to appear [7,40].

Vitamin B12 deficiency with the classic hematologic and neurologic signs and symptoms is uncommon [11]. However, low or marginal vitamin B12 status (200–300 pg/mL [148–221 pmol/L]) without these symptoms is much more common, at up to 40% in Western populations, especially in those with low intakes of vitamin B12-rich foods [9,11]. The prevalence of vitamin B12 deficiency varies by cutoff level and biomarker used. For example, among adults age 19 and older who participated in NHANES between 1999 and 2004, the rate of low vitamin B12 levels in serum was 3% with a cutoff of less than 200 pg/mL (148 pmol/L) and 26% with a cutoff of less than 350 pg/mL (258 pmol/L) [39]. Approximately 21% of adults older than 60 had abnormal levels of at least one vitamin B12 biomarker [41].

Typically, vitamin B12 deficiency is treated with vitamin B12 injections because this method bypasses any barriers to absorption. However, high doses of oral vitamin B12 might also be effective. A 2018 Cochrane Review included three randomized controlled trials (RCTs) that compared very high doses (1,000–2,000 mcg) of oral with intramuscular vitamin B12 for vitamin B12 deficiency in a total of 153 participants [42]. The evidence from these studies, although of low quality, showed that the ability of high oral doses of vitamin B12 supplements to normalize serum vitamin B12 was similar to that of intramuscular vitamin B12.
Groups at Risk of Vitamin B12 Inadequacy

Certain groups of people are more likely than others to be vitamin B12 deficient. These include older adults, people with pernicious anemia or gastrointestinal disorders, and those who have had gastrointestinal surgery. Other groups that are at risk of vitamin B12 deficiency include people who follow vegetarian diets and the infants of women who follow vegan diets.

The following groups are among those most likely to be vitamin B12 deficient.
Older adults

Depending on the definition used, between 3% and 43% of community-dwelling older adults, especially those with atrophic gastritis, have vitamin B12 deficiency based on serum vitamin B12 levels [43,44]. The deficiency rate at a cutoff of less than 211 pg/mL (156 pmol/L) at admission to a long-term care facility, according to one study, was 14%, and 38% of these older adults had levels lower than 407 pg/mL (300 pmol/L) [44].

Conditions associated with vitamin B12 inadequacy include pernicious anemia, present in about 15% to 25% of older adults with vitamin B12 deficiency [45]. Atrophic gastritis, an autoimmune condition affecting 2% of the general population but 8% to 9% of adults age 65 and older, decreases production of intrinsic factor and secretion of hydrochloric acid in the stomach and thus decreases absorption of vitamin B12 [45,46]. A third condition associated with vitamin B12 deficiency in older adults is Helicobacter pylori infection, possibly because this bacterium causes inflammation that leads to malabsorption of vitamin B12 from food [47].
People with pernicious anemia

Pernicious anemia is an irreversible autoimmune disease that affects the gastric mucosa and results in gastric atrophy [1,48]. This disease leads to attacks on parietal cells in the stomach, resulting in failure to produce intrinsic factor and malabsorption of dietary vitamin B12, recycled biliary vitamin B12, and free vitamin B12 [1,6,11].Therefore, without treatment, pernicious anemia causes vitamin B12 deficiency, even in the presence of adequate vitamin B12 intakes.

Pernicious anemia is the most common cause of clinically evident vitamin B12 deficiency around the world [11,48]. The incidence of pernicious anemia in the United States is an estimated 151 per 100,000, and this condition is more common in women and in people of European ancestry [48].
People with gastrointestinal disorders

Individuals with stomach and small intestine disorders, such as celiac disease and Crohn’s disease, may be unable to absorb enough vitamin B12 from food to maintain healthy body stores [2,3,49]. However, although rates of vitamin B12 deficiency are higher in people with celiac disease than other people [50], the evidence for whether rates of vitamin B12 deficiency are higher in people with Crohn’s disease is mixed [49,51,52]. Vitamin B12 deficiency in people with Crohn’s disease is typically treated with intramuscular cobalamin injections, but high doses of oral cyanocobalamin therapy (e.g., 1,000 mcg/day) might be equally effective [53].
People who have had gastrointestinal surgery

Surgical procedures in the gastrointestinal tract, such as for weight loss or to remove all or part of the stomach, can cause a complete or partial loss of cells that secrete hydrochloric acid and cells that secrete intrinsic factor [54,55]. Thus, these procedures reduce the amount of vitamin B12, particularly food-bound vitamin B12, that the body absorbs [54,55]. High doses (1,000 mcg/day) of oral methylcobalamin supplements appear to be as effective as hydroxycobalamin injections in normalizing vitamin B12 values in patients who have undergone Roux-en-Y gastric bypass surgery [55].
People who follow vegetarians diets

Vegans who consume no animal products and vegetarians who consume some animal products (e.g., dairy products, eggs, or both) but not meat have a higher risk of developing vitamin B12 deficiency because natural food sources of vitamin B12 are limited to animal foods [3,57]. Consumption of foods fortified with vitamin B12 (such as fortified nutritional yeasts) as well as vitamin B12 supplements can substantially reduce the risk of deficiency [57].
Infants of women who follow vegan diets

Exclusively breastfed infants of women who consume no animal products might have very limited reserves of vitamin B12 and can develop vitamin B12 deficiency, sometimes very early in life [58]. The infant’s deficiency can be severe, especially if the mother’s deficiency is severe or caused by pernicious anemia; sometimes, the mother’s own deficiency is clinically mild and not recognized. Undetected and untreated vitamin B12 deficiency in infants can result in neurological damage, failure to thrive, developmental delays, and anemia [2,58,59]. The reasons include the small amounts of vitamin B12 in the breast milk of vegan mothers as well as the limited amounts of vitamin B12 crossing the placenta in these women during fetal development.
Vitamin B12 and Health

This section focuses on areas of health in which vitamin B12 might be involved: cancer, cardiovascular disease (CVD), dementia and cognitive function, and energy and endurance.
Cancer

Some evidence from observational studies and clinical trials suggests that higher intakes or blood concentrations of vitamin B12 may increase the risk of cancer. However, other evidence contradicts those findings, showing a link between lower intakes or concentrations of vitamin B12 and an increased cancer risk or no link at all. More research is needed to clarify the association between high or low intakes of vitamin B12 and the risk of cancer.

The evidence for a relationship between vitamin B12 and cancer risk is mixed. Some evidence supports a link between increased cancer risk and higher intakes or blood concentrations of vitamin B12, some supports a link with lower intakes or concentrations, and some evidence indicates no link at all.

Observational evidence supporting an association between higher vitamin B12 levels and increased cancer risk includes an analysis of data on 757,185 people (median age 56 years) with plasma vitamin B12 measurements [60]. The results showed that the adjusted 1-year risk of cancer was 1.74 to 4.72 times higher among those with vitamin B12 levels above 813 pg/mL (600 pmol/L) than those with levels in the normal range of 203 to 813 pg/mL (150–600 pmol/L). An analysis by some of the same investigators of data from Danish medical registries for 25,017 people who had a cancer diagnosis between 1998 and 2014 found 1-year survival rates of 35.8% in those whose plasma cobalamin levels were higher than 1,084 pg/mL (800 pmol/L) and 69.3% in those with levels between 271 and 813 pg/mL (200–600 pmol/L) [61].

Some observational evidence also shows an association between supplements containing vitamin B12 and a higher risk of certain types of cancer. For example, an assessment of 77,118 participants age 50 to 76 years in the Vitamins and Lifestyle cohort study found that use of at least 55 mcg/day supplemental vitamin B12 for an average of 10 years was associated with a 40% higher risk of lung cancer in men [62]. However, the study found no association between supplemental vitamin B12 use and cancer risk in women.

Limited clinical trial evidence supports the finding that higher vitamin B12 intakes might increase cancer risk. In an analysis of data on 2,524 participants in the B Vitamins for the Prevention of Osteoporotic Fractures trial who were treated with supplements containing 400 mcg/day folic acid and 500 mcg/day vitamin B12 for 2 to 3 years, the risk of colorectal cancer was significantly higher, at 3.4%, in the supplementation group than in the placebo group, whose rate was 2% [63]. However, high folic acid levels are potentially linked to increased risk of colorectal cancer, so the result might be due to the folic acid rather than the vitamin B12 [64]. Furthermore, the supplements had no significant effect on overall cancer risk.

Some observational evidence shows no association between high vitamin B12 concentrations or intakes and increased risk of certain cancers. For example, higher vitamin B12 intakes or serum concentrations were not associated with an increased risk of pancreatic cancer [65], breast cancer [66], or esophageal cancer or gastric cancer [67]. Clinical trials support the lack of association between higher vitamin B12 intakes and cancer risk. [68-70]. For example, a meta-analysis of 18 RCTs that included 74,498 individuals found that supplements containing B vitamins, including 20 to 2,000 mcg/day vitamin B12, had little or no effect on cancer incidence, cancer deaths, or all-cause mortality during follow-up periods of 2 to 7.3 years [70].

Finally, evidence pointing to an association between lower vitamin B12 levels and a higher cancer risk includes observational data showing a risk of gastric cancer that was 5.8 times higher in male smokers with lower vitamin B12 levels (less than 394 pg/mL [291 pmol/L]) than in those with levels higher than 591 pg/mL (436 pmol/L) [71]. Also, two meta-analyses found associations between lower vitamin B12 concentrations or intakes and a higher risk of colorectal cancer [72] and prostate cancer [73].

More evidence is needed to clarify whether high or low intakes of vitamin B12 influence the risk of cancer.
Cardiovascular disease

Because vitamin B12 plays a role in homocysteine metabolism, researchers have investigated whether vitamin B12 supplementation can reduce the risk of cardiovascular disease by lowering homocysteine levels. However, the current evidence suggests that there is no association between vitamin B12 supplementation and the risk of cardiovascular disease.

An elevated homocysteine level has been associated with an increased risk of CVD [74,75]. Vitamin B12 and other B vitamins are involved in homocysteine metabolism, and researchers have hypothesized that supplementation with these micronutrients can reduce CVD risk by lowering homocysteine levels [74,75].

However, studies on the association between vitamin B12 intake and risk of CVD have had negative results. Two meta-analyses—one of 11 prospective cohort studies in 369,746 individuals who developed 5,133 cases of coronary heart disease and one of 12 prospective (mostly cohort) studies in 389,938 participants who developed 10,749 cases of stroke over 4.2 to 19 years (including 10 reports that evaluated the association between dietary vitamin B12 intake and stroke risk)—found no significant association between vitamin B12 intakes and risk of coronary heart disease [76] or stroke [77].

RCTs have found that vitamin B12 (and folic acid) supplements lower homocysteine levels but not CVD risk. The authors of a Cochrane Review of the effects of homocysteine-lowering interventions on cardiovascular events based on 15 studies in 71,422 participants concluded that supplements of vitamin B12 alone or with other B vitamins do not prevent heart attacks or reduce death rates in people at risk of or with CVD [78]. More recently, an extended follow-up of the B-PROOF trial, (which compared 400 mcg folic acid and 500 mcg vitamin B-12 daily with placebo) in 1,298 participants found that after a median of 54 months, the intervention had no effect on CVD risk [79].

Overall, the available evidence suggests that supplementation with vitamin B12 alone or in combination with other B-vitamins does not reduce the risk of CVD or of CVD-related death.
Dementia and cognitive function

Elevated homocysteine levels may have a negative effect on the brain, and this seems to be supported by observational studies that have found correlations between low serum vitamin B12 concentrations and poor cognitive function. However, some observational studies have reported no such correlation, and randomized controlled trials have shown no improvement in cognitive function among older adults with or without dementia, mild cognitive impairment, or Alzheimer’s disease when supplemented with vitamin B12 alone or in combination with folic acid, vitamin B6, or both. More evidence is needed to elucidate the effects of vitamin B12 supplementation on cognitive function and cognitive decline.

Observational studies have shown positive associations between elevated homocysteine levels and the incidence of both Alzheimer’s disease and dementia [80-83]. Scientists hypothesize that elevated homocysteine levels might have a negative effect on the brain via numerous mechanisms, including cerebrovascular ischemia leading to neuronal cell death, activation of tau kinases leading to tangle deposition, and inhibition of methylation reactions [82].

Most observational studies have found correlations between low serum vitamin B12 concentrations alone or in combination with high folate concentrations and poor cognitive function [84-89]. For example, an analysis of cross-sectional 2011–2014 NHANES data on 2,420 adults age 60 years or older found that low vitamin B12 (MMA greater than 0.27 micromol/L or serum vitamin B12 less than 203 pg/mL [150 pmol/L]) combined with high folic acid—unmetabolized serum folic acid greater than 0.44 mcg/L (1 nmol/L) or serum total folate higher than 32.7 mcg/L (74.1 nmol/L)—was associated with an almost two to three times higher risk of cognitive impairment [84].

However, a few observational studies have found no such association [90,91]. In addition, according to a systematic review of 35 prospective cohort studies in 14,325 participants age 47 to 101 years followed for an average of 5.4 years, the evidence does not support a role for low vitamin B12 in the development of cognitive impairment or dementia [92].

In general, evidence from RCTs does not show that vitamin B12 supplementation alone or with folic acid, vitamin B6, or both for 1 to 2 years improves cognitive function in older adults with or without dementia, mild cognitive impairment, or Alzheimer’s disease, even though supplementation lowers homocysteine levels [93-96]. For example, an RCT administered 400 mcg/day folic acid and 500 mcg/day vitamin B12 (B-vitamin group) or a placebo for 2 years to 2,919 adults age 65 and older with homocysteine levels of 12 to 50 mcmol/L [95]. Although homocysteine concentrations declined significantly more (by 5.0 mcmol/L) in the supplementation group than in the placebo group (1.3 mcmol/L), cognitive test scores did not differ between groups. A Cochrane Review of vitamin and mineral supplements to maintain cognitive function in cognitively healthy people included 14 studies that compared folic acid, vitamin B12, vitamin B6, or a combination of these supplements to placebo in 27,882 participants, most of whom were age 60 years or older [97]. The supplements had little to no effect on global cognitive function when administered for up to 5 years and appeared to have no impact when administered for 5 to 10 years.

Similarly, supplementation with vitamin B12 alone or with other B vitamins does not appear to decrease the risk or slow the progression of dementia or Alzheimer’s disease in older adults. A Cochrane Review evaluated the effects of vitamin and mineral supplements on cognitive function and dementia in people with mild cognitive impairment [98]. The review included five trials with 879 participants that investigated B vitamin supplements (one study of folic acid only and four trials of vitamins B6 and B12 and folic acid). Taking these B vitamins for 6 to 24 months had no apparent effect on episodic memory, executive function, speed of processing, or quality of life, although one study found a slower rate of brain atrophy over 2 years.

Additional clinical trials are needed to better understand the effects of vitamin B12 supplementation on cognitive function and cognitive decline.
Energy and endurance

Vitamin B12 supplementation does not appear to improve athletic performance or endurance in people who have sufficient vitamin B12 status.

Because of its role in energy metabolism, vitamin B12 is often promoted as an energy enhancer and an athletic performance and endurance booster. However, vitamin B12 supplementation appears to have no beneficial effect on performance in the absence of a nutritional deficit [99,100].
Health Risks from Excessive Vitamin B12

Vitamin B12 does not have a tolerable upper intake level because it is generally considered to be safe, even at high doses.

The FNB did not establish a UL for vitamin B12 because of its low potential for toxicity [1]. Even at large doses, vitamin B12 is generally considered to be safe because the body does not store excess amounts.
Interactions with Medications

Vitamin B12 supplements may interact with medications, and some medications, including gastric acid inhibitors and metformin, may affect vitamin B12 levels.

Vitamin B12 supplements have the potential to interact with certain medications. In addition, several types of medications might adversely affect vitamin B12 levels. A few examples are provided below. Individuals taking these and other medications on a regular basis should discuss their vitamin B12 status with their health care providers.
Gastric acid inhibitors

Gastric acid inhibitors include proton pump inhibitors, such as omeprazole (Prilosec) and lansoprazole (Prevacid), and histamine 2-receptor antagonists, such as cimetidine (Tagamet) and ranitidine (Zantac). These drugs are used to treat gastroesophageal reflux disease and peptic ulcer disease. They can interfere with vitamin B12 absorption from food by slowing the release of gastric acid into the stomach and thereby lead to vitamin B12 deficiency [101-103].
Metformin

Metformin, an antihyperglycemic agent used as first-line treatment for prediabetes and diabetes, might reduce the absorption of vitamin B12 and significantly reduce serum vitamin B12 concentrations [103].
Vitamin B12 and Healthful Diets

In general, a person’s nutritional needs should be met primarily through the diet, including fortified foods. Dietary supplements may be useful in cases where it is not possible to meet the needs for specific nutrients through food alone, especially during certain life stages. The Dietary Guidelines for Americans offers a general description of healthy dietary patterns.

The federal government’s 2020–2025 Dietary Guidelines for Americans notes that "Because foods provide an array of nutrients and other components that have benefits for health, nutritional needs should be met primarily through foods...In some cases, fortified foods and dietary supplements are useful when it is not possible otherwise to meet needs for one or more nutrients (e.g., during specific life stages such as pregnancy)."

For more information about building a healthy dietary pattern, refer to the Dietary Guidelines for Americans and the USDA's MyPlate.

The Dietary Guidelines for Americans describes a healthy dietary pattern as one that

    Includes a variety of vegetables; fruits; grains (at least half whole grains); fat-free and low-fat milk, yogurt, and cheese; and oils.
        Milk and milk products are good sources of vitamin B12. Many ready-to-eat breakfast cereals are fortified with vitamin B12.
    Includes a variety of protein foods such as lean meats; poultry; eggs; seafood; beans, peas, and lentils; nuts and seeds; and soy products.
        Fish and red meat are excellent sources of vitamin B12. Poultry and eggs also contain vitamin B12.
    Limits foods and beverages higher in added sugars, saturated fat, and sodium.
    Limits alcoholic beverages.
    Stays within your daily calorie needs.

References

    Institute of Medicine, Food and Nutrition Board. Dietary Reference Intakes for Thiamin, Riboflavin, Niacin, Vitamin B(6), Folate, Vitamin B(12), Pantothenic Acid, Biotin, and Choline. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 1998.
    Carmel R. Cobalamin (vitamin B12). In: Ross AC, Caballero B, Cousins RJ, Tucker KL, Ziegler TR, eds. Modern Nutrition in Health and Disease. 11th ed. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2014:369-89.
    Allen LH. Vitamin B12. In: Coates PM, Betz JM, Blackman MR, et al., eds. Encyclopedia of Dietary Supplements. 2nd ed. London and New York: Informa Healthcare; 2010:812-20.
    Allen LH. Vitamin B-12. Adv Nutr 2012;3:54-5. [PubMed abstract]
    Stabler SP. Vitamin B12. In: Marriott BP, Birt DF, Stallings VA, Yates AA, eds. Present Knowledge in Nutrition. 11th ed. Washington, DC: Elsevier; 2020:257-71.
    Allen LH, Miller JW, de Groot L, Rosenberg IH, Smith AD, Refsum H, et al. Biomarkers of Nutrition for Development (BOND): Vitamin B-12 Review. J Nutr 2018;148:1995S-2027S. [PubMed abstract]
    Langan RC, Goodbred AJ. Vitamin B12 deficiency: Recognition and management. Am Fam Physician 2017;96:384-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Maruvada P, Stover PJ, Mason JB, Bailey RL, Davis CD, Field MS, et al. Knowledge gaps in understanding the metabolic and clinical effects of excess folates/folic acid: A summary, and perspectives, from an NIH workshop. Am J Clin Nutr 2020;112:1390-403 [PubMed abstract]
    Hannibal L, Lysne V, Bjørke-Monsen A-L, Behringer S, Grünert SC, Spiekerkoetter U, et al. Biomarkers and algorithms for the diagnosis of vitamin B12 deficiency. Front Mol Biosci 2016;3:27. [PubMed abstract]
    Mineva EM, Sternberg MR, Zhang M, Aoki Y, Storandt R, Bailey RL, et al. Age-specific reference ranges are needed to interpret serum methylmalonic acid concentrations in the US population. Am J Clin Nutr 2019;110:158-68. [PubMed abstract]
    Green R, Allen LH, Bjorke-Monsen AL, Brito A, Gueant JL, Miller JW, et al. Vitamin B12 deficiency. Nat Rev Dis Primers 2017;3:17040. [PubMed abstract]
    Watanabe F, Bito T. Vitamin B12 sources and microbial interaction. Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 2018 Jan;243(2):148-158. [PubMed abstract]
    Watanabe F, Yabuta Y, Bito T, Teng F. Vitamin B₁₂-containing plant food sources for vegetarians. Nutrients 2014;6:1861-73. [PubMed abstract]
    Damayanti D, Jaceldo-Siegl K, Beeson WL, Fraser G, Oda K, Haddad EH. Foods and supplements associated with vitamin B(12) biomarkers among vegetarian and non-vegetarian participants of the Adventist Health Study-2 (AHS-2) Calibration study. Nutrients 2018;10:722. [PubMed abstract]
    Henjum S, Manger M, Hampel D, Brantsaeter AL, Shahab-Ferdows S, Bastani NE, et al. Vitamin B12 concentrations in milk from Norwegian women during the six first months of lactation. Eur J Clin Nutr 2020;74:749-56. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Food and Drug Adminstration. Code of Federal Regulations Title 21 § 107 -- Infant Formula. 2019.
    Doets EL, In 't Veld PH, Szczecińska A, Dhonukshe-Rutten RA, Cavelaars AE, van 't Veer P, et al. Systematic review on daily vitamin B12 losses and bioavailability for deriving recommendations on vitamin B12 intake with the factorial approach. Ann Nutr Metab 2013;62:311-22. [PubMed abstract]
    Allen LH. Bioavailability of vitamin B12. Int J Vitam Nutr Res 2010;80:330-5. [PubMed abstract]
    Vogiatzoglou A, Smith AD, Nurk E, Berstad P, Drevon CA, Ueland PM, et al. Dietary sources of vitamin B-12 and their association with plasma vitamin B-12 concentrations in the general population: the Hordaland Homocysteine Study. Am J Clin Nutr 2009;89:1078-87. [PubMed abstract]
    Tucker KL, Rich S, Rosenberg I, Jacques P, Dallal G, Wilson PW, et al. Plasma vitamin B-12 concentrations relate to intake source in the Framingham Offspring study. Am J Clin Nutr 2000;71:514-22. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Department of Agriculture. FoodData Central. 2020.
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Food Labeling: Revision of the Nutrition and Supplement Facts Labels. 2016.
    Office of Dietary Supplements, National Institutes of Health. Dietary Supplement Label Database. 2021.
    Paul C, Brady DM. Comparative bioavailability and utilization of particular forms of B(12) Supplements with potential to mitigate B(12)-related genetic polymorphisms. Integr Med 2017;16:42-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Carmel R. How I treat cobalamin (vitamin B12) deficiency. Blood 2008;112:2214-21. [PubMed abstract]
    Yazaki Y, Chow G, Mattie M. A single-center, double-blinded, randomized controlled study to evaluate the relative efficacy of sublingual and oral vitamin B-complex administration in reducing total serum homocysteine levels. J Altern Complement Med 2006;12:881-5. [PubMed abstract]
    Sharabi A, Cohen E, Sulkes J, Garty M. Replacement therapy for vitamin B12 deficiency: Comparison between the sublingual and oral route. Br J Clin Pharmacol 2003;56:635-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Slot WB, Merkus FW, Van Deventer SJ, Tytgat GN. Normalization of plasma vitamin B12 concentration by intranasal hydroxocobalamin in vitamin B12-deficient patients. Gastroenterology 1997;113:430-3. [PubMed abstract]
    Estourgie-van Burk GF, van der Kuy PHM, de Meij TG, Benninga MA, Kneepkens CMF. Intranasal treatment of vitamin B(12) deficiency in children. Eur J Pediatr 2020;179:349-52. [PubMed abstract]
    Tillemans MP, Donders EM, Verweij SL, Van der Hoeven RT, Kalisvaart KJ. Effect of administration route on the pharmacokinetics of cobalamin in elderly patients: A randomized controlled trial. Curr Ther Res Clin Exp 2014;76:21-5. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service. What We Eat in America, Total Nutrient Intakes by Gender and Age, 2017-March 2020 Prepandemic. 2022.
    U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service. Usual Nutrient Intake From Food and Beverages, by Gender and Age. What We Eat in America, NHANES 2017-March 2020 Prepandemic. 2023.
    Han S, Wu L, Wang W, Li N, Wu X. Trends in dietary nutrients by demographic characteristics and BMI among US adults, 2003-2016. Nutrients 2019;11:2617. [PubMed abstract]
    Zhou Y, Wang A, Yeung LF, Qi YP, Pfeiffer CM, et al. Folate and vitamin B12 usual intake and biomarker status by intake source in United States adults aged ≥19 y: NHANES 2007-2018. Am J Clin Nutr 2023;118(1): 241-254. [PubMed abstract]
    Obeid R, Murphy M, Sole-Navais P, Yajnik C. Cobalamin status from pregnancy to early childhood: Lessons from global experience. Adv Nutr 2017;8:971-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Clarke R. B-vitamins and prevention of dementia. Proc Nutr Soc 2008;67:75-81. [PubMed abstract]
    Laird E, O'Halloran AM, Molloy AM, Healy M, Hernandez B, O'Connor D, Kenny RA, Briggs R. Low vitamin B12 but not folate is associated with incident depressive symptoms in community-dwelling older adults: a 4 year longitudinal study. Br J Nutr. 2021 Dec 13:1-22. [PubMed abstract]
    Mikkelsen K, Stojanovska L, Apostolopoulos V. The Effects of Vitamin B in Depression. Curr Med Chem. 2016;23(38):4317-4337. [PubMed abstract]
    Wu Y, Zhang L, Li S, Zhang D. Associations of dietary vitamin B1, vitamin B2, vitamin B6, and vitamin B12 with the risk of depression: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Nutr Rev. 2022 Feb 10;80(3):351-366. [PubMed abstract]
    Hunt A, Harrington D, Robinson S. Vitamin B12 deficiency. BMJ 2014;349:g5226. [PubMed abstract]
    Bailey RL, Carmel R, Green R, Pfeiffer CM, Cogswell ME, Osterloh JD, et al. Monitoring of vitamin B-12 nutritional status in the United States by using plasma methylmalonic acid and serum vitamin B-12. Am J Clin Nutr 2011;94:552-61. [PubMed abstract]
    Wang H, Li L, Qin LL, Song Y, Vidal-Alaball J, Liu TH. Oral vitamin B(12) versus intramuscular vitamin B(12) for vitamin B(12) deficiency. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2018;3:CD004655. [PubMed abstract]
    Wong CW. Vitamin B12 deficiency in the elderly: Is it worth screening? Hong Kong Med J 2015;21:155-64. [PubMed abstract]
    Pfisterer KJ, Sharratt MT, Heckman GG, Keller HH. Vitamin B12 status in older adults living in Ontario long-term care homes: prevalence and incidence of deficiency with supplementation as a protective factor. Appl Physiol Nutr Metab 2016;41:219-22. [PubMed abstract]
    Cavalcoli F, Zilli A, Conte D, Massironi S. Micronutrient deficiencies in patients with chronic atrophic autoimmune gastritis: A review. World J Gastroenterol 2017;23:563-72. [PubMed abstract]
    Weck MN, Stegmaier C, Rothenbacher D, Brenner H. Epidemiology of chronic atrophic gastritis: Population-based study among 9444 older adults from Germany. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2007;26:879-87. [PubMed abstract]
    Kalkan Ç, Karakaya F, Tüzün A, Gençtürk ZB, Soykan I. Factors related to low serum vitamin B12 levels in elderly patients with non-atrophic gastritis in contrast to patients with normal vitamin B12 levels. Geriatr Gerontol Int 2016;16:686-92. [PubMed abstract]
    Rojas Hernandez CM, Oo TH. Advances in mechanisms, diagnosis, and treatment of pernicious anemia. Discov Med 2015;19:159-68. [PubMed abstract]
    Ao M, Tsuji H, Shide K, Kosaka Y, Noda A, Inagaki N, et al. High prevalence of vitamin B-12 insufficiency in patients with Crohn's disease. Asia Pac J Clin Nutr 2017;26:1076-81. [PubMed abstract]
    Bledsoe AC, King KS, Larson JJ, Snyder M, Absah I, Choung RS, et al. Micronutrient deficiencies Are common in contemporary celiac disease despite lack of overt malabsorption symptoms. Mayo Clin Proc 2019;94:1253-60. [PubMed abstract]
    Ward MG, Kariyawasam VC, Mogan SB, Patel KV, Pantelidou M, Sobczyńska-Malefora A, et al. Prevalence and risk factors for functional vitamin B12 deficiency in patients with Crohn's disease. Inflamm Bowel Dis 2015;21:2839-47. [PubMed abstract]
    Pan Y, Liu Y, Guo H, Jabir MS, Liu X, Cui W, et al. Associations between folate and vitamin B12 levels and inflammatory bowel disease: A meta-analysis. Nutrients 2017;9:382. [PubMed abstract]
    Gomollón F, Gargallo CJ, Muñoz JF, Vicente R, Lue A, Mir A, et al. Oral cyanocobalamin is effective in the treatment of vitamin B12 deficiency in Crohn's disease. Nutrients 2017;9:308. [PubMed abstract]
    Dogan K, Aarts EO, Koehestanie P, Betzel B, Ploeger N, de Boer H, et al. Optimization of vitamin suppletion after Roux-en-Y gastric bypass surgery can lower postoperative deficiencies: a randomized controlled trial. Medicine (Baltimore) 2014;93:e169. [PubMed abstract]
    Kornerup LS, Hvas CL, Abild CB, Richelsen B, Nexo E. Early changes in vitamin B12 uptake and biomarker status following Roux-en-Y gastric bypass and sleeve gastrectomy. Clin Nutr 2019;38:906-11. [PubMed abstract]
    Schijns W, Homan J, van der Meer L, Janssen IM, van Laarhoven CJ, Berends FJ, et al. Efficacy of oral compared with intramuscular vitamin B-12 supplementation after Roux-en-Y gastric bypass: A randomized controlled trial. Am J Clin Nutr 2018;108:6-12. [PubMed abstract]
    Pawlak R, Lester SE, Babatunde T. The prevalence of cobalamin deficiency among vegetarians assessed by serum vitamin B12: A review of literature. Eur J Clin Nutr 2014;68:541-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Dror DK, Allen LH. Vitamin B-12 in human milk: A systematic review. Adv Nutr 2018;9:358s-66s. [PubMed abstract]
    Piccoli GB, Clari R, Vigotti FN, Leone F, Attini R, Cabiddu G, et al. Vegan-vegetarian diets in pregnancy: Danger or panacea? A systematic narrative review. Bjog 2015;122:623-33. [PubMed abstract]
    Arendt JFH, Sørensen HT, Horsfall LJ, Petersen I. Elevated vitamin B12 levels and cancer risk in UK primary care: A THIN database cohort study. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2019;28:814-21. [PubMed abstract]
    Arendt JFH, Farkas DK, Pedersen L, Nexo E, Sørensen HT. Elevated plasma vitamin B12 levels and cancer prognosis: A population-based cohort study. Cancer Epidemiology 2016;40:158-65. [PubMed abstract]
    Brasky TM, White E, Chen CL. Long-term, supplemental, one-carbon metabolism-related vitamin B Use in relation to lung cancer risk in the Vitamins and Lifestyle (VITAL) cohort. J Clin Oncol 2017;35:3440-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Oliai Araghi S, Kiefte-de Jong JC, van Dijk SC, Swart KMA, van Laarhoven HW, van Schoor NM, et al. Folic acid and vitamin B12 supplementation and the risk of cancer: Long-term follow-up of the B Vitamins for the Prevention of Osteoporotic Fractures (B-PROOF) trial. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2019;28:275-82. [PubMed abstract]
    Ulrich CM, Potter JD. Folate supplementation: Too much of a good thing? Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2006;15:189-93. [PubMed abstract]
    Wei DH, Mao QQ. Vitamin B6, vitamin B12 and methionine and risk of pancreatic cancer: A meta-analysis. Nutr J 2020;19:111. [PubMed abstract]
    Wu W, Kang S, Zhang D. Association of vitamin B6, vitamin B12 and methionine with risk of breast cancer: A dose-response meta-analysis. Br J Cancer 2013;109:1926-44. [PubMed abstract]
    Xiao Q, Freedman ND, Ren J, Hollenbeck AR, Abnet CC, Park Y. Intakes of folate, methionine, vitamin B6, and vitamin B12 with risk of esophageal and gastric cancer in a large cohort study. Br J Cancer 2014;110:1328-33. [PubMed abstract]
    Andreeva VA, Touvier M, Kesse-Guyot E, Julia C, Galan P, Hercberg S. B vitamin and/or omega-3 fatty acid supplementation and cancer: Ancillary findings from the Supplementation with Folate, Vitamins B6 and B12, and/or Omega-3 Fatty Acids (SU.FOL.OM3) randomized trial. Arch Intern Med 2012;172:540-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Zhang SM, Cook NR, Albert CM, Gaziano JM, Buring JE, Manson JE. Effect of combined folic acid, vitamin B6, and vitamin B12 on cancer risk in women: a randomized trial. Jama 2008;300:2012-21. [PubMed abstract]
    Zhang S-L, Chen T-S, Ma C-Y, Meng Y-B, Zhang Y-F, Chen Y-W, et al. Effect of vitamin B supplementation on cancer incidence, death due to cancer, and total mortality: A PRISMA-compliant cumulative meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Medicine (Baltimore) 2016;95:e3485. [PubMed abstract]
    Miranti EH, Stolzenberg-Solomon R, Weinstein SJ, Selhub J, Männistö S, Taylor PR, et al. Low vitamin B(12) increases risk of gastric cancer: A prospective study of one-carbon metabolism nutrients and risk of upper gastrointestinal tract cancer. Int J Cancer 2017;141:1120-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Sun NH, Huang XZ, Wang SB, Li Y, Wang LY, Wang HC, et al. A dose-response meta-analysis reveals an association between vitamin B12 and colorectal cancer risk. Public Health Nutr 2016;19:1446-56. [PubMed abstract]
    Liu Y, Wang X, Sun X, Lu S, Liu S. Vitamin intake and pancreatic cancer risk reduction: A meta-analysis of observational studies. Medicine (Baltimore) 2018;97:e0114. [PubMed abstract]
    Djuric D, Jakovljevic V, Zivkovic V, Srejovic I. Homocysteine and homocysteine-related compounds: An overview of the roles in the pathology of the cardiovascular and nervous systems. Can J Physiol Pharmacol 2018;96:991-1003. [PubMed abstract]
    Debreceni B, Debreceni L. The role of homocysteine-lowering B-vitamins in the primary prevention of cardiovascular disease. Cardiovasc Ther 2014;32:130-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Jayedi A, Zargar MS. Intake of vitamin B6, folate, and vitamin B12 and risk of coronary heart disease: A systematic review and dose-response meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies. Crit Rev Food Sci Nutr 2019;59:2697-707. [PubMed abstract]
    Chen L, Li Q, Fang X, Wang X, Min J, Wang F. Dietary intake of homocysteine metabolism-related B-vitamins and the risk of stroke: A dose-response meta-analysis of prospective studies. Adv Nutr 2020. [PubMed abstract]
    Martí-Carvajal AJ, Solà I, Lathyris D, Dayer M. Homocysteine-lowering interventions for preventing cardiovascular events. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2017;8:CD006612. [PubMed abstract]
    Oliai Araghi S, Kiefte-de Jong JC, van Dijk SC, Swart KMA, Ploegmakers KJ, Zillikens MC, et al. Long-term effects of folic acid and vitamin-B12 supplementation on fracture risk and cardiovascular disease: Extended follow-up of the B-PROOF trial. Clin Nutr 2021;40:1199-1206. [PubMed abstract]
    Ho RC, Cheung MW, Fu E, Win HH, Zaw MH, Ng A, et al. Is high homocysteine level a risk factor for cognitive decline in elderly? A systematic review, meta-analysis, and meta-regression. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry 2011;19:607-17. [PubMed abstract]
    Kim S, Choi BY, Nam JH, Kim MK, Oh DH, Yang YJ. Cognitive impairment is associated with elevated serum homocysteine levels among older adults. Eur J Nutr 2019;58:399-408. [PubMed abstract]
    Smith AD, Refsum H. Homocysteine, B vitamins, and cognitive impairment. Annu Rev Nutr 2016;36:211-39. [PubMed abstract]
    Smith AD, Refsum H, Bottiglieri T, Fenech M, Hooshmand B, McCaddon A, et al. Homocysteine and dementia: An international consensus statement. J Alzheimers Dis 2018;62:561-70. [PubMed abstract]
    Bailey RL, Jun S, Murphy L, Green R, Gahche JJ, Dwyer JT, et al. High folic acid or folate combined with low vitamin B-12 status: Potential but inconsistent association with cognitive function in a nationally representative cross-sectional sample of US older adults participating in the NHANES. Am J Clin Nutr 2020;112:1547-57. [PubMed abstract]
    Horvat P, Gardiner J, Kubinova R, Pajak A, Tamosiunas A, Schöttker B, et al. Serum folate, vitamin B-12 and cognitive function in middle and older age: The HAPIEE study. Exp Gerontol 2016;76:33-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Lildballe DL, Fedosov S, Sherliker P, Hin H, Clarke R, Nexo E. Association of cognitive impairment with combinations of vitamin B₁₂-related parameters. Clin Chem 2011;57:1436-43. [PubMed abstract]
    Miles LM, Mills K, Clarke R, Dangour AD. Is there an association of vitamin B12 status with neurological function in older people? A systematic review. Br J Nutr 2015;114:503-8. [PubMed abstract]
    O'Connor DMA, Laird EJ, Carey D, O'Halloran AM, Clarke R, Kenny RA, et al. Plasma concentrations of vitamin B12 and folate and global cognitive function in an older population: cross-sectional findings from The Irish Longitudinal Study on Ageing (TILDA). Br J Nutr 2020;124:602-10. [PubMed abstract]
    Boumenna T, Scott TM, Lee JS, Palacios N, Tucker KL. Folate, vitamin B-12, and cognitive function in the Boston Puerto Rican Health Study. Am J Clin Nutr 2020;113:179-86. [PubMed abstract]
    Lachner C, Martin C, John D, Nekkalapu S, Sasan A, Steinle N, et al. Older adult psychiatric inpatients with non-cognitive disorders should be screened for vitamin B12 deficiency. J Nutr Health Aging 2014;18:209-12. [PubMed abstract]
    Ma F, Wu T, Zhao J, Ji L, Song A, Zhang M, et al. Plasma homocysteine and serum folate and vitamin B(12) levels in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease: A case-control study. Nutrients 2017;9:725. [PubMed abstract]
    O'Leary F, Allman-Farinelli M, Samman S. Vitamin B₁₂ status, cognitive decline and dementia: A systematic review of prospective cohort studies. Br J Nutr 2012;108:1948-61. [PubMed abstract]
    Dangour AD, Allen E, Clarke R, Elbourne D, Fletcher AE, Letley L, et al. Effects of vitamin B-12 supplementation on neurologic and cognitive function in older people: A randomized controlled trial. Am J Clin Nutr 2015;102:639-47. [PubMed abstract]
    Jernerén F, Elshorbagy AK, Oulhaj A, Smith SM, Refsum H, Smith AD. Brain atrophy in cognitively impaired elderly: the importance of long-chain ω-3 fatty acids and B vitamin status in a randomized controlled trial. Am J Clin Nutr 2015;102:215-21. [PubMed abstract]
    van der Zwaluw NL, Dhonukshe-Rutten RA, van Wijngaarden JP, Brouwer-Brolsma EM, van de Rest O, In 't Veld PH, et al. Results of 2-year vitamin B treatment on cognitive performance: Secondary data from an RCT. Neurology 2014;83:2158-66. [PubMed abstract]
    Zhang DM, Ye JX, Mu JS, Cui XP. Efficacy of vitamin B supplementation on cognition in elderly patients with cognitive-related diseases. J Geriatr Psychiatry Neurol 2017;30:50-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Rutjes AW, Denton DA, Di Nisio M, Chong LY, Abraham RP, Al-Assaf AS, et al. Vitamin and mineral supplementation for maintaining cognitive function in cognitively healthy people in mid and late life. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2018;12:CD011906. [PubMed abstract]
    McCleery J, Abraham RP, Denton DA, Rutjes AW, Chong LY, Al-Assaf AS, et al. Vitamin and mineral supplementation for preventing dementia or delaying cognitive decline in people with mild cognitive impairment. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2018;11:CD011905. [PubMed abstract]
    Lukaski HC. Vitamin and mineral status: Effects on physical performance. Nutrition 2004;20:632-44. [PubMed abstract]
    Jung YP, Earnest CP, Koozehchian M, Galvan E, Dalton R, Walker D, et al. Effects of acute ingestion of a pre-workout dietary supplement with and without p-synephrine on resting energy expenditure, cognitive function and exercise performance. J Int Soc Sports Nutr 2017;14:3. [PubMed abstract]
    Jung SB, Nagaraja V, Kapur A, Eslick GD. Association between vitamin B12 deficiency and long-term use of acid-lowering agents: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Intern Med J 2015;45:409-16. [PubMed abstract]
    Lam JR, Schneider JL, Zhao W, Corley DA. Proton pump inhibitor and histamine 2 receptor antagonist use and vitamin B12 deficiency. JAMA 2013;310:2435-42. [PubMed abstract]
    Miller JW. Proton pump inhibitors, H2-receptor antagonists, metformin, and vitamin B-12 deficiency: Clinical implications. Adv Nutr 2018;9:511S-8S. [PubMed abstract]

Disclaimer

This fact sheet by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Office of Dietary Supplements (ODS) provides information that should not take the place of medical advice. We encourage you to talk to your health care providers (doctor, registered dietitian, pharmacist, etc.) about your interest in, questions about, or use of dietary supplements and what may be best for your overall health. Any mention in this publication of a specific product or service, or recommendation from an organization or professional society, does not represent an endorsement by ODS of that product, service, or expert advice.

Updated: July 2, 2025


 Vitamin B6: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals (original version)
Vitamin B6: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals
Table of Contents

    Introduction
    Recommended Intakes
    Sources of Vitamin B6
    Vitamin B6 Intakes and Status
    Vitamin B6 Deficiency
    Groups at Risk of Vitamin B6 Inadequacy
    Vitamin B6 and Health
    Health Risks from Excessive Vitamin B6
    Interactions with Medications
    Vitamin B6 and Healthful Diets
    References
    Disclaimer

Introduction

Vitamin B6 is a water-soluble vitamin that is naturally present in many foods, added to others, and available as a dietary supplement. It is the generic name for six compounds (vitamers) with vitamin B6 activity: pyridoxine, an alcohol; pyridoxal, an aldehyde; and pyridoxamine, which contains an amino group; and their respective 5'-phosphate esters. Pyridoxal 5' phosphate (PLP) and pyridoxamine 5' phosphate (PMP) are the active coenzyme forms of vitamin B6 [1,2]. Substantial proportions of the naturally occurring pyridoxine in fruits, vegetables, and grains exist in glycosylated forms that exhibit reduced bioavailability [3].

Vitamin B6 in coenzyme forms performs a wide variety of functions in the body and is extremely versatile, with involvement in more than 100 enzyme reactions, mostly concerned with protein metabolism [1]. Both PLP and PMP are involved in amino acid metabolism, and PLP is also involved in the metabolism of one-carbon units, carbohydrates, and lipids [3]. Vitamin B6 also plays a role in cognitive development through the biosynthesis of neurotransmitters and in maintaining normal levels of homocysteine, an amino acid in the blood [3]. Vitamin B6 is involved in gluconeogenesis and glycogenolysis, immune function (for example, it promotes lymphocyte and interleukin-2 production), and hemoglobin formation [3].

The human body absorbs vitamin B6 in the jejunum. Phosphorylated forms of the vitamin are dephosphorylated, and the pool of free vitamin B6 is absorbed by passive diffusion [2].

Vitamin B6 concentrations can be measured directly by assessing concentrations of PLP; other vitamers; or total vitamin B6 in plasma, erythrocytes, or urine [1]. Vitamin B6 concentrations can also be measured indirectly by assessing either erythrocyte aminotransferase saturation by PLP or tryptophan metabolites. Plasma PLP is the most common measure of vitamin B6 status.

PLP concentrations of more than 30 nmol/L have been traditional indicators of adequate vitamin B6 status in adults [3]. However, the Food and Nutrition Board (FNB) at the Institute of Medicine of the National Academies (formerly National Academy of Sciences) used a plasma PLP level of 20 nmol/L as the major indicator of adequacy to calculate the Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDAs) for adults [1,3].
Recommended Intakes

Intake recommendations for vitamin B6 and other nutrients are provided in the Dietary Reference Intakes (DRIs) developed by the FNB [1]. DRI is the general term for a set of reference values used for planning and assessing nutrient intakes of healthy people. These values, which vary by age and gender, include the following:

    Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA): Average daily level of intake sufficient to meet the nutrient requirements of nearly all (97%–98%) healthy individuals; often used to plan nutritionally adequate diets for individuals
    Adequate Intake (AI): Intake at this level is assumed to ensure nutritional adequacy; established when evidence is insufficient to develop an RDA
    Estimated Average Requirement (EAR): Average daily level of intake estimated to meet the requirements of 50% of healthy individuals; usually used to assess the nutrient intakes of groups of people and to plan nutritionally adequate diets for them; can also be used to assess the nutrient intakes of individuals
    Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL): Maximum daily intake unlikely to cause adverse health effects.

Table 1 lists the current RDAs for vitamin B6 [1]. For infants from birth to 12 months, the FNB established an AI for vitamin B6 that is equivalent to the mean intake of vitamin B6 in healthy, breastfed infants.
Table 1: Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDAs) for Vitamin B6 [1] Age 	Male 	Female 	Pregnancy 	Lactation
Birth to 6 months 	0.1 mg* 	0.1 mg* 		
7–12 months 	0.3 mg* 	0.3 mg* 		
1–3 years 	0.5 mg 	0.5 mg 		
4–8 years 	0.6 mg 	0.6 mg 		
9–13 years 	1.0 mg 	1.0 mg 		
14–18 years 	1.3 mg 	1.2 mg 	1.9 mg 	2.0 mg
19–50 years 	1.3 mg 	1.3 mg 	1.9 mg 	2.0 mg
51+ years 	1.7 mg 	1.5 mg 		

* Adequate Intake (AI)
Sources of Vitamin B6
Food

Vitamin B6 is found in a wide variety of foods [1,3,4]. The richest sources of vitamin B6 include fish, beef liver and other organ meats, potatoes and other starchy vegetables, and fruit (other than citrus). In the United States, adults obtain most of their dietary vitamin B6 from fortified cereals, beef, poultry, starchy vegetables, and some noncitrus fruits [1,3,5]. About 75% of vitamin B6 from a mixed diet is bioavailable [1].

The table of selected food sources of vitamin B6 suggests many dietary sources of vitamin B6.
Table 2: Vitamin B6 Content of Selected Foods [4] Food 	Milligrams (mg) per serving 	Percent DV*
Chickpeas, canned, 1 cup 	1.1 	65
Beef liver, pan fried, 3 ounces 	0.9 	53
Tuna, yellowfin, fresh, cooked, 3 ounces 	0.9 	53
Salmon, sockeye, cooked, 3 ounces 	0.6 	35
Chicken breast, roasted, 3 ounces 	0.5 	29
Breakfast cereals, fortified with 25% of the DV for vitamin B6 	0.4 	25
Potatoes, boiled, 1 cup 	0.4 	25
Turkey, meat only, roasted, 3 ounces 	0.4 	25
Banana, 1 medium 	0.4 	25
Marinara (spaghetti) sauce, ready to serve, 1 cup 	0.4 	25
Ground beef, patty, 85% lean, broiled, 3 ounces 	0.3 	18
Waffles, plain, ready to heat, toasted, 1 	0.3 	18
Bulgur, cooked, 1 cup 	0.2 	12
Cottage cheese, 1% low fat, 1 cup 	0.2 	12
Squash, winter, baked, ½ cup 	0.2 	12
Rice, white, long grain, enriched, cooked, 1 cup 	0.1 	6
Nuts, mixed, dry roasted, 1 ounce 	0.1 	6
Raisins, seedless, ½ cup 	0.1 	6
Onions, chopped, ½ cup 	0.1 	6
Spinach, frozen, chopped, boiled, ½ cup 	0.1 	6
Tofu, raw, firm, prepared with calcium sulfate, ½ cup 	0.1 	6
Watermelon, raw, 1 cup 	0.1 	6

*DV = Daily Value. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) developed DVs to help consumers compare the nutrient contents of foods and dietary supplements within the context of a total diet. The DV for vitamin B6 is 1.7 mg for adults and children age 4 years and older [6]. FDA does not require food labels to list vitamin B6 content unless vitamin B6 has been added to the food. Foods providing 20% or more of the DV are considered to be high sources of a nutrient, but foods providing lower percentages of the DV also contribute to a healthful diet.

The U.S. Department of Agriculture's (USDA's) FoodData Central lists the nutrient content of many foods and provides a comprehensive list of foods containing vitamin B6 arranged by nutrient content and by food name.
Dietary supplements

Vitamin B6 is available in multivitamins, in supplements containing other B complex vitamins, and as a stand-alone supplement [7]. The most common vitamin B6 vitamer in supplements is pyridoxine (in the form of pyridoxine hydrochloride [HCl]), although some supplements contain PLP. Vitamin B6 supplements are available in oral capsules or tablets (including sublingual and chewable tablets) and liquids. Absorption of vitamin B6 from supplements is similar to that from food sources and does not differ substantially among the various forms of supplements [1]. Although the body absorbs large pharmacological doses of vitamin B6 well, it quickly eliminates most of the vitamin in the urine [8].

About 28%–36% of the general population uses supplements containing vitamin B6 [9,10]. Adults age 51 years or older and children younger than 9 are more likely than members of other age groups to take supplements containing vitamin B6.
Vitamin B6 Intakes and Status

Most children, adolescents, and adults in the United States consume the recommended amounts of vitamin B6, according to an analysis of data from the 2003–2004 National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) [10]. The average vitamin B6 intake is about 1.5 mg/day in women and 2 mg/day in men [1].

However, 11% of vitamin B6 supplement users and 24% of people in the United States who do not take supplements containing vitamin B6 have low plasma PLP concentrations (less than 20 nmol/L) [10]. In the 2003–2004 NHANES analysis, plasma PLP concentrations were low even in some groups that took 2.0–2.9 mg/day, which is higher than the current RDA. Among supplement users and nonusers, plasma PLP levels were much lower in women than men, non-Hispanic blacks than non-Hispanic whites, current smokers than never smokers, and people who were underweight than those of normal weight. Teenagers had the lowest vitamin B6 concentrations, followed by adults age 21–44 years. However, plasma PLP levels in the elderly were not particularly low, even in those who did not use supplements. Based on these data, the authors of this analysis concluded that the current RDAs might not guarantee adequate vitamin B6 status in many population groups [10].

PLP concentrations tend to be low in people with alcohol dependence; those with obesity; and pregnant women, especially those with preeclampsia or eclampsia [1]. They are also low in people with malabsorption syndromes such as celiac disease, Crohn's disease, and ulcerative colitis [3].
Vitamin B6 Deficiency

Isolated vitamin B6 deficiency is uncommon; inadequate vitamin B6 status is usually associated with low concentrations of other B-complex vitamins, such as vitamin B12 and folic acid [2]. Vitamin B6 deficiency causes biochemical changes that become more obvious as the deficiency progresses [2].

Vitamin B6 deficiency is associated with microcytic anemia, electroencephalographic abnormalities, dermatitis with cheilosis (scaling on the lips and cracks at the corners of the mouth) and glossitis (swollen tongue), depression and confusion, and weakened immune function [1,2]. Individuals with borderline vitamin B6 concentrations or mild deficiency might have no deficiency signs or symptoms for months or even years. In infants, vitamin B6 deficiency causes irritability, abnormally acute hearing, and convulsive seizures [2].

End-stage renal diseases, chronic renal insufficiency, and other kidney diseases can cause vitamin B6 deficiency [3]. In addition, vitamin B6 deficiency can result from malabsorption syndromes, such as celiac disease, Crohn's disease, and ulcerative colitis. Certain genetic diseases, such as homocystinuria, can also cause vitamin B6 deficiency [2]. Some medications, such as antiepileptic drugs, can lead to deficiency over time.
Groups at Risk of Vitamin B6 Inadequacy

Frank vitamin B6 deficiencies are relatively rare in the United States but some individuals might have marginal vitamin B6 status [2]. The following groups are among those most likely to have inadequate intakes of vitamin B6.
Individuals with impaired renal function

People with poor renal function, including those with end-stage renal disease and chronic renal insufficiency, often have low vitamin B6 concentrations [3]. Plasma PLP concentrations are also low in patients receiving maintenance kidney dialysis or intermittent peritoneal dialysis, as well as those who have undergone a kidney transplant, perhaps due to increased metabolic clearance of PLP [11]. Patients with kidney disease often show clinical symptoms similar to those of people with vitamin B6 deficiency [11].
Individuals with autoimmune disorders

People with rheumatoid arthritis often have low vitamin B6 concentrations, and vitamin B6 concentrations tend to decrease with increased disease severity [3]. These low vitamin B6 levels are due to the inflammation caused by the disease and, in turn, increase the inflammation associated with the disease. Although vitamin B6 supplements can normalize vitamin B6 concentrations in patients with rheumatoid arthritis, they do not suppress the production of inflammatory cytokines or decrease levels of inflammatory markers [3,12].

Patients with celiac disease, Crohn's disease, ulcerative colitis, inflammatory bowel disease, and other malabsorptive autoimmune disorders tend to have low plasma PLP concentrations [3]. The mechanisms for this effect are not known. However, celiac disease is associated with lower pyridoxine absorption, and low PLP concentrations in inflammatory bowel disease could be due to the inflammatory response [3].
People with alcohol dependence

Plasma PLP concentrations tend to be very low in people with alcohol dependence [1]. Alcohol produces acetaldehyde, which decreases net PLP formation by cells and competes with PLP in protein binding [1,3]. As a result, the PLP in cells might be more susceptible to hydrolysis by membrane-bound phosphatase. People with alcohol dependence might benefit from pyridoxine supplementation [3].
Vitamin B6 and Health
Cardiovascular disease

Scientists have hypothesized that certain B vitamins (folic acid, vitamin B12, and vitamin B6) might reduce cardiovascular disease risk by lowering homocysteine levels [1,13]. Therefore, several clinical trials have assessed the safety and efficacy of supplemental doses of B vitamins to reduce heart disease risk. Evaluating the impact of vitamin B6 from many of these trials is challenging because these studies also included folic acid and vitamin B12 supplementation. For example, the Heart Outcomes Prevention Evaluation 2 (HOPE 2) trial, which included more than 5,500 adults with known cardiovascular disease, found that supplementation for 5 years with vitamin B6 (50 mg/day), vitamin B12 (1 mg/day), and folic acid (2.5 mg/day) reduced homocysteine levels and decreased stroke risk by about 25%, but the study did not include a separate vitamin B6 group [14].

Moreover, most other large clinical trials have failed to demonstrate that supplemental B vitamins actually reduce the risk of cardiovascular events, even though they lower homocysteine levels. For example, a randomized clinical trial in 5,442 women age 42 or older found no effect of vitamin B6 supplementation (50 mg/day) in combination with 2.5 mg folic acid and 1 mg vitamin B12 on cardiovascular disease risk [15]. Two large randomized controlled trials, the Norwegian Vitamin Trial and the Western Norway B Vitamin Intervention Trial, did include a group that received only vitamin B6 supplements (40 mg/day). The combined analysis of data from these two trials showed no benefit of vitamin B6 supplementation, with or without folic acid (0.8 mg/day) plus vitamin B12 (0.4 mg/day), on major cardiovascular events in 6,837 patients with ischemic heart disease [13]. In a trial of adults who had suffered a nondisabling stroke, supplementation with high or low doses of a combination of vitamins B6 and B12 and folic acid for 2 years had no effect on subsequent stroke incidence, cardiovascular events, or risk of death [16].

The research to date provides little evidence that supplemental amounts of vitamin B6, alone or with folic acid and vitamin B12, can help reduce the risk or severity of cardiovascular disease and stroke.
Cancer

Some research has associated low plasma vitamin B6 concentrations with an increased risk of certain kinds of cancer [3]. For example, a meta-analysis of prospective studies found that people with a vitamin B6 intake in the highest quintile had a 20% lower risk of colorectal cancer than those with an intake in the lowest quintile [17].

However, the small number of clinical trials completed to date has not shown that vitamin B6 supplementation can help prevent cancer or reduce its impact on mortality. For example, an analysis of data from two large randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials in Norway found no association between vitamin B6 supplementation and cancer incidence, mortality, or all-cause mortality [18].
Cognitive function

Poor vitamin B6 status has been hypothesized to play a role in the cognitive decline that some older adults experience [19]. Several studies have demonstrated an association between vitamin B6 and brain function in the elderly. For example, an analysis of data from the Boston Normative Aging Study found associations between higher serum vitamin B6 concentrations and better memory test scores in 70 men age 54–81 years [20].

However, a systematic review of 14 randomized controlled trials found insufficient evidence of an effect of vitamin B6 supplementation alone or in combination with vitamin B12 and/or folic acid on cognitive function in people with normal cognitive function, dementia, or ischemic vascular disease [19]. According to this review, most of the studies were of low quality and limited applicability. A Cochrane Review found no evidence that short-term vitamin B6 supplementation (for 5–12 weeks) improves cognitive function or mood in the two studies that the authors evaluated [21]. The review did find some evidence that daily vitamin B6 supplements (20 mg) can affect biochemical indices of vitamin B6 status in healthy older men, but these changes had no overall impact on cognition.

More evidence is needed to determine whether vitamin B6 supplements might help prevent or treat cognitive decline in elderly people.
Premenstrual syndrome

Some evidence suggests that vitamin B6 supplements could reduce the symptoms of premenstrual syndrome (PMS), but conclusions are limited due to the poor quality of most studies [22]. A meta-analysis of nine published trials involving almost 1,000 women with PMS found that vitamin B6 is more effective in reducing PMS symptoms than placebo, but most of the studies analyzed were small and several had methodological weaknesses [22]. A more recent double-blind, randomized controlled trial in 94 women found that 80 mg pyridoxine taken daily over the course of three cycles was associated with statistically significant reductions in a broad range of PMS symptoms, including moodiness; irritability; forgetfulness; bloating; and, especially, anxiety [23]. The potential effectiveness of vitamin B6 in alleviating the mood-related symptoms of PMS could be due to its role as a cofactor in neurotransmitter biosynthesis [24]. Although vitamin B6 shows promise for alleviating PMS symptoms, more research is needed before drawing firm conclusions.
Nausea and vomiting in pregnancy

About half of all women experience nausea and vomiting in the first few months of pregnancy, and about 50%–80% experience nausea only [25,26]. Although this condition is generally known as morning sickness, it often lasts throughout the day. The condition is not life threatening and typically goes away after 12–20 weeks, but its symptoms can disrupt a person's social and physical functioning.

Prospective studies on vitamin B6 supplements to treat morning sickness have had mixed results. In two randomized, placebo-controlled trials, 30–75 mg of oral pyridoxine per day significantly decreased nausea in pregnant women who were experiencing nausea [27,28]. The authors of a recent Cochrane Review of studies on interventions for nausea and vomiting in pregnancy could not draw firm conclusions on the value of vitamin B6 to control the symptoms of morning sickness [26].

Randomized trials have shown that a combination of vitamin B6 and doxylamine (an antihistamine) is associated with a 70% reduction in nausea and vomiting in pregnant women and lower hospitalization rates for this problem [25,29].

The American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology (ACOG) recommends monotherapy with 10–25 mg of vitamin B6 three or four times a day to treat nausea and vomiting in pregnancy [29]. If the patient's condition does not improve, ACOG recommends adding doxylamine. Before taking a vitamin B6 supplement, pregnant women should consult a physician because doses could approach the UL.
Health Risks from Excessive Vitamin B6

High intakes of vitamin B6 from food sources have not been reported to cause adverse effects [1]. However, chronic administration of 1–6 g oral pyridoxine per day for 12–40 months can cause severe and progressive sensory neuropathy characterized by ataxia (loss of control of bodily movements) [10,30-33]. Symptom severity appears to be dose dependent, and the symptoms usually stop if the patient discontinues the pyridoxine supplements as soon as the neurologic symptoms appear. Other effects of excessive vitamin B6 intakes include painful, disfiguring dermatological lesions; photosensitivity; and gastrointestinal symptoms, such as nausea and heartburn [1,2,30].

The scientific literature includes isolated case reports of congenital defects in the infants of women who took pyridoxine supplements during the first half of pregnancy [7]. However, a more recent observational study found no association between pyridoxine supplementation (mean dose 132.3 ± 74 mg/day) in pregnant women starting at 7 weeks gestation and continuing for 9 ± 4.2 weeks and teratogenic effects in their infants [34].

The FNB has established ULs for vitamin B6 that apply to both food and supplement intakes (Table 3) [1]. The FNB noted that although several reports show sensory neuropathy occurring at doses lower than 500 mg/day, studies in patients treated with vitamin B6 (average dose of 200 mg/day) for up to 5 years found no evidence of this effect. Based on limitations in the data on potential harms from long-term use, the FNB halved the dose used in these studies to establish a UL of 100 mg/day for adults. ULs are lower for children and adolescents based on body size. The ULs do not apply to individuals receiving vitamin B6 for medical treatment, but such individuals should be under the care of a physician.
Table 3: Tolerable Upper Intake Levels (ULs) for Vitamin B6 [1] Age 	Male 	Female 	Pregnancy 	Lactation
Birth to 6 months 	Not possible to establish* 	Not possible to establish* 		
7–12 months 	Not possible to establish* 	Not possible to establish* 		
1–3 years 	30 mg 	30 mg 		
4–8 years 	40 mg 	40 mg 		
9–13 years 	60 mg 	60 mg 		
14–18 years 	80 mg 	80 mg 	80 mg 	80 mg
19+ years 	100 mg 	100 mg 	100 mg 	100 mg

*Breast milk, formula, and food should be the only sources of vitamin B6 for infants.

In 2023, the Panel on Nutrition, Novel Foods and Food Allergens of the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) released a scientific opinion on the tolerable upper intake levels for vitamin B6 [35]. Based on systematic reviews that examined associations between vitamin B6 and peripheral neuropathy, the panel set an upper limit for vitamin B6 of 12 mg/day for all adults, including women who are pregnant or lactating, with lower amounts ranging from 2.2 to 10.7 mg/day for infants and children, depending on age.
Interactions with Medications

Vitamin B6 can interact with certain medications, and several types of medications might adversely affect vitamin B6 levels. A few examples are provided below. Individuals taking these and other medications on a regular basis should discuss their vitamin B6 status with their health care providers.
Cycloserine

Cycloserine (Seromycin) is a broad-spectrum antibiotic used to treat tuberculosis. In combination with pyridoxal phosphate, cycloserine increases urinary excretion of pyridoxine [9]. The urinary loss of pyridoxine might exacerbate the seizures and neurotoxicity associated with cycloserine. Pyridoxine supplements can help prevent these adverse effects.
Antiepileptic medications

Some antiepileptic drugs, including valproic acid (Depakene, Stavzor), carbamazepine (Carbatrol, Epitol, Tegretol, and others), and phenytoin (Dilantin) increase the catabolism rate of vitamin B6 vitamers, resulting in low plasma PLP concentrations and hyperhomocysteinemia [36,37]. High homocysteine levels in antiepileptic drug users might increase the risk of epileptic seizures and systemic vascular events, including stroke, and reduce the ability to control seizures in patients with epilepsy. Furthermore, patients typically use antiepileptic drugs for years, increasing their risk of chronic vascular toxicity.

Some research also indicates that pyridoxine supplementation (200 mg/day for 12–120 days) can reduce serum concentrations of phenytoin and phenobarbital, possibly by increasing the drugs' metabolism [33,38]. Whether lower pyridoxine doses have any effect is not known [9].

Levetiracetam (Keppra) is an antiepileptic medication with behavioral side effects that include irritability, agitation, and depression [39-41]. Preliminary evidence suggests that vitamin B6 supplementation—at such doses as 50–350 mg/day in children [40-42] and 50–100 mg/day in adults [39]—might reduce these side effects.
Theophylline

Theophylline (Aquaphyllin, Elixophyllin, Theolair, Truxophyllin, and many others) can prevent or treat shortness of breath, wheezing, and other breathing problems caused by asthma, chronic bronchitis, emphysema, and other lung diseases. Patients treated with theophylline often have low plasma PLP concentrations, which could contribute to the neurological and central nervous system side effects associated with theophylline, including seizures [9,33].
Vitamin B6 and Healthful Diets

The federal government's 2020–2025 Dietary Guidelines for Americans notes that "Because foods provide an array of nutrients and other components that have benefits for health, nutritional needs should be met primarily through foods. ... In some cases, fortified foods and dietary supplements are useful when it is not possible otherwise to meet needs for one or more nutrients (e.g., during specific life stages such as pregnancy)."

For more information about building a healthy dietary pattern, refer to the Dietary Guidelines for Americans and the USDA's MyPlate.

The Dietary Guidelines for Americans describes a healthy dietary pattern as one that

    Includes a variety of vegetables; fruits; grains (at least half whole grains); fat-free and low-fat milk, yogurt, and cheese; and oils.
        Many fruits, vegetables, and whole grains are good sources of vitamin B6. Some ready-to-eat breakfast cereals are fortified with vitamin B6.
    Includes a variety of protein foods such as lean meats; poultry; eggs; seafood; beans, peas, and lentils; nuts and seeds; and soy products.
        Fish, beef, and turkey contain high amounts of vitamin B6. Beans and nuts are also sources of vitamin B6.
    Limits foods and beverages higher in added sugars, saturated fat, and sodium.
    Limits alcoholic beverages.
    Stays within your daily calorie needs.

References

    Institute of Medicine. Food and Nutrition Board. Dietary Reference Intakes: Thiamin, Riboflavin, Niacin, Vitamin B6, Folate, Vitamin B12, Pantothenic Acid, Biotin, and Choline. Washington, DC: National Academy Press; 1998.
    McCormick D. Vitamin B6. In: Bowman B, Russell R, eds. Present Knowledge in Nutrition. 9th ed. Washington, DC: International Life Sciences Institute; 2006.
    Mackey A, Davis S, Gregory J. Vitamin B6. In: Shils M, Shike M, Ross A, Caballero B, Cousins R, eds. Modern Nutrition in Health and Disease. 10th ed. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2005.
    U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service. FoodData Central, 2019.
    Subar AF, Krebs-Smith SM, Cook A, Kahle LL. Dietary sources of nutrients among US adults, 1989 to 1991. J Am Diet Assoc 1998;98:537-47. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Food Labeling: Revision of the Nutrition and Supplement Facts Labels. 2016.
    Natural Medicines Comprehensive Database. Vitamin B6. 2011.
    Simpson JL, Bailey LB, Pietrzik K, Shane B, Holzgreve W. Micronutrients and women of reproductive potential: required dietary intake and consequences of dietary deficiency or excess. Part I--Folate, Vitamin B12, Vitamin B6. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 2010;23:1323-43. [PubMed abstract]
    Bailey RL, Gahche JJ, Lentino CV, Dwyer JT, Engel JS, Thomas PR, et al. Dietary supplement use in the United States, 2003-2006. J Nutr 2011;141:261-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Morris MS, Picciano MF, Jacques PF, Selhub J. Plasma pyridoxal 5'-phosphate in the US population: the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, 2003-2004. Am J Clin Nutr 2008;87:1446-54. [PubMed abstract]
    Merrill AH, Jr., Henderson JM. Diseases associated with defects in vitamin B6 metabolism or utilization. Annu Rev Nutr 1987;7:137-56. [PubMed abstract]
    Chiang EP, Selhub J, Bagley PJ, Dallal G, Roubenoff R. Pyridoxine supplementation corrects vitamin B6 deficiency but does not improve inflammation in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Res Ther 2005;7:R1404-11. [PubMed abstract]
    Ebbing M, Bonaa KH, Arnesen E, Ueland PM, Nordrehaug JE, Rasmussen K, et al. Combined analyses and extended follow-up of two randomized controlled homocysteine-lowering B-vitamin trials. J Intern Med 2010;268:367-82. [PubMed abstract]
    Saposnik G, Ray JG, Sheridan P, McQueen M, Lonn E. Homocysteine-lowering therapy and stroke risk, severity, and disability: additional findings from the HOPE 2 trial. Stroke 2009;40:1365-72. [PubMed abstract]
    Albert CM, Cook NR, Gaziano JM, Zaharris E, MacFadyen J, Danielson E, et al. Effect of folic acid and B vitamins on risk of cardiovascular events and total mortality among women at high risk for cardiovascular disease: a randomized trial. JAMA 2008;299:2027-36. [PubMed abstract]
    Toole JF, Malinow MR, Chambless LE, Spence JD, Pettigrew LC, Howard VJ, et al. Lowering homocysteine in patients with ischemic stroke to prevent recurrent stroke, myocardial infarction, and death: the Vitamin Intervention for Stroke Prevention (VISP) randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2004;291:565-75. [PubMed abstract]
    Larsson SC, Orsini N, Wolk A. Vitamin B6 and risk of colorectal cancer: a meta-analysis of prospective studies. JAMA 2010;303:1077-83. [PubMed abstract]
    Ebbing M, Bonaa KH, Nygard O, Arnesen E, Ueland PM, Nordrehaug JE, et al. Cancer incidence and mortality after treatment with folic acid and vitamin B12. JAMA 2009;302:2119-26. [PubMed abstract]
    Balk EM, Raman G, Tatsioni A, Chung M, Lau J, Rosenberg IH. Vitamin B6, B12, and folic acid supplementation and cognitive function: a systematic review of randomized trials. Arch Intern Med 2007;167:21-30. [PubMed abstract]
    Riggs KM, Spiro A, 3rd, Tucker K, Rush D. Relations of vitamin B-12, vitamin B-6, folate, and homocysteine to cognitive performance in the Normative Aging Study. Am J Clin Nutr 1996;63:306-14. [PubMed abstract]
    Malouf R, Grimley Evans J. The effect of vitamin B6 on cognition. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2003:CD004393. [PubMed abstract]
    Wyatt KM, Dimmock PW, Jones PW, Shaughn O'Brien PM. Efficacy of vitamin B-6 in the treatment of premenstrual syndrome: systematic review. BMJ 1999;318:1375-81. [PubMed abstract]
    Kashanian M, Mazinani R, Jalalmanesh S. Pyridoxine (vitamin B6) therapy for premenstrual syndrome. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 2007;96:43-4. [PubMed abstract]
    Bendich A. The potential for dietary supplements to reduce premenstrual syndrome (PMS) symptoms. J Am Coll Nutr 2000;19:3-12. [PubMed abstract]
    Niebyl JR. Clinical practice. Nausea and vomiting in pregnancy. N Engl J Med 2010;363:1544-50. [PubMed abstract]
    Matthews A, Dowswell T, Haas DM, Doyle M, O'Mathuna DP. Interventions for nausea and vomiting in early pregnancy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2010:CD007575. [PubMed abstract]
    Vutyavanich T, Wongtra-ngan S, Ruangsri R. Pyridoxine for nausea and vomiting of pregnancy: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1995;173:881-4. [PubMed abstract]
    Sahakian V, Rouse D, Sipes S, Rose N, Niebyl J. Vitamin B6 is effective therapy for nausea and vomiting of pregnancy: a randomized, double-blind placebo-controlled study. Obstet Gynecol 1991;78:33-6. [PubMed abstract]
    ACOG (American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology) Practice Bulletin: nausea and vomiting of pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 2004;103:803-14. [PubMed abstract]
    Bendich A, Cohen M. Vitamin B6 safety issues. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1990;585:321-30. [PubMed abstract]
    Gdynia HJ, Muller T, Sperfeld AD, Kuhnlein P, Otto M, Kassubek J, et al. Severe sensorimotor neuropathy after intake of highest dosages of vitamin B6. Neuromuscul Disord 2008;18:156-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Perry TA, Weerasuriya A, Mouton PR, Holloway HW, Greig NH. Pyridoxine-induced toxicity in rats: a stereological quantification of the sensory neuropathy. Exp Neurol 2004;190:133-44. [PubMed abstract]
    Bender DA. Non-nutritional uses of vitamin B6. Br J Nutr 1999;81:7-20. [PubMed abstract]
    Shrim A, Boskovic R, Maltepe C, Navios Y, Garcia-Bournissen F, Koren G. Pregnancy outcome following use of large doses of vitamin B6 in the first trimester. J Obstet Gynaecol 2006;26:749-51. [PubMed abstract]
    EFSA NDA Panel (EFSA Panel on Nutrition, Novel Foods and Food Allergens), Turck, D, Bohn, T, Castenmiller, J, de Henauw, et al. Scientific opinion on the tolerable upper intake level for vitamin B6. EFSA Journal 2023; 21(5):8006, 110 pp.
    Clayton PT. B6-responsive disorders: a model of vitamin dependency. J Inherit Metab Dis 2006;29:317-26. [PubMed abstract]
    Apeland T, Froyland ES, Kristensen O, Strandjord RE, Mansoor MA. Drug-induced pertubation of the aminothiol redox-status in patients with epilepsy: improvement by B-vitamins. Epilepsy Res 2008;82:1-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Hansson O, Sillanpaa M. Letter: Pyridoxine and serum concentration of phenytoin and phenobarbitone. Lancet 1976;1:256. [PubMed abstract]
    Alsaadi T, El Hammasi K, Shahrour TM. Does pyridoxine control behavioral symptoms in adult patients treated with levetiracetam? Case series from UAE. Epilepsy Behav Case Rep 2015;4:94-5. [PubMed abstract]
    Davis GP, McCarthy JT, Magill DB, Coffey B. Behavioral effects of levetiracetam mitigated by pyridoxine. J Child Adolesc Psychopharmacol 2009;19:209-11. [PubMed abstract]
    Marino S, Vitaliti G, Marino SD, et al. Pyridoxine add-on treatment for the control of behavioral adverse effects induced by levetiracetam in children: a case-control prospective study. Ann Pharmacother 2018;52:645-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Major P, Greenberg E, Khan A, Thiele EA. Pyridoxine supplementation for the treatment of levetiracetam-induced behavior side effects in children: preliminary results. Epilepsy Behav. 2008 Oct;13(3):557-9. [PubMed abstract]

Disclaimer

This fact sheet by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Office of Dietary Supplements (ODS) provides information that should not take the place of medical advice. We encourage you to talk to your health care providers (doctor, registered dietitian, pharmacist, etc.) about your interest in, questions about, or use of dietary supplements and what may be best for your overall health. Any mention in this publication of a specific product or service, or recommendation from an organization or professional society, does not represent an endorsement by ODS of that product, service, or expert advice.

Updated: June 16, 2023


 Vitamin C: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals (original version)
Vitamin C: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals
Table of Contents

    Introduction
    Recommended Intakes
    Sources of Vitamin C
    Vitamin C Intakes and Status
    Vitamin C Deficiency
    Groups at Risk of Vitamin C Inadequacy
    Vitamin C and Health
    Health Risks from Excessive Vitamin C
    Interactions with Medications
    Vitamin C and Healthful Diets
    References
    Disclaimer

For information on vitamin C and COVID-19, see Dietary Supplements in the Time of COVID-19.
Introduction

Vitamin C, also known as L-ascorbic acid, is a water-soluble vitamin that is naturally present in some foods, added to others, and available as a dietary supplement. Humans, unlike most animals, are unable to synthesize vitamin C endogenously, so it is an essential dietary component [1].

Vitamin C is required for the biosynthesis of collagen, L-carnitine, and certain neurotransmitters; vitamin C is also involved in protein metabolism [1,2]. Collagen is an essential component of connective tissue, which plays a vital role in wound healing. Vitamin C is also an important physiological antioxidant [3] and has been shown to regenerate other antioxidants within the body, including alpha-tocopherol (vitamin E) [4]. Because vitamin C can limit the damaging effects of free radicals through its antioxidant activity, researchers are examining whether it might help prevent or delay the development of diseases in which oxidative stress plays a role, such as certain cancers and cardiovascular disease (CVD). In addition to its biosynthetic and antioxidant functions, vitamin C plays an important role in immune function [4] and improves the absorption of nonheme iron [5], the form of iron that is present in plant-based foods. Insufficient vitamin C intake causes scurvy, which is characterized by fatigue or lassitude, widespread connective tissue weakness, and capillary fragility [1,2,4,6-9].

The intestinal absorption of vitamin C is regulated by at least one specific dose-dependent, active transporter [4]. Cells accumulate vitamin C via a second specific transport protein. In vitro studies have found that oxidized vitamin C, or dehydroascorbic acid, enters cells via some facilitated glucose transporters and is then reduced internally to ascorbic acid. The physiologic importance of dehydroascorbic acid uptake and its contribution to overall vitamin C economy are unknown.
Assessing vitamin C status

The body tightly controls tissue and plasma concentrations of vitamin C. Higher doses of vitamin C have lower absorption than moderate doses, and absorbed, unmetabolized ascorbic acid is excreted in the urine. Vitamin C status is typically assessed by measuring plasma vitamin C levels because other measures are more difficult to assess and the results may not be reliable.

Oral vitamin C produces tissue and plasma concentrations that the body tightly controls. Approximately 70% to 90% of vitamin C is absorbed at moderate intakes of 30 to 180 milligrams (mg)/day. However, at doses above 1 gram (g)/day, absorption falls to less than 50%, and absorbed, unmetabolized ascorbic acid is excreted in the urine [4]. Results from pharmacokinetic studies indicate that oral doses of 1.25 g/day ascorbic acid produce mean peak plasma vitamin C concentrations of 135 micromoles/liter (L), which are about two times higher than those produced by consuming 200 to 300 mg/day ascorbic acid from vitamin C-rich foods [10]. Pharmacokinetic modeling predicts that even doses as high as 3 g ascorbic acid taken every 4 hours would produce peak plasma concentrations of only 220 micromoles/L [10].

The total body content of vitamin C ranges from 300 mg (at near scurvy) to about 2 g [4]. High levels of vitamin C (millimolar concentrations) are maintained in cells and tissues and are highest in leukocytes (white blood cells), eyes, adrenal glands, the pituitary gland, and the brain. Relatively low levels of vitamin C (micromolar concentrations) are found in extracellular fluids, such as plasma and saliva [4].

Vitamin C status is typically assessed by measuring plasma vitamin C levels [4,11]. Other measures, such as a leukocyte vitamin C concentration, could be more accurate indicators of tissue vitamin C levels, but they are more difficult to assess and the results are not always reliable [4,9,11].
Recommended Intakes

The Food and Nutrition Board at the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine has established Recommended Dietary Allowances and Adequate Intakes for vitamin C. These values range from 90 to 120 mg for adults and from 15 to 115 mg for infants, children, and adolescents, depending on age, sex, and life stage. People who smoke require 35 mg more vitamin C per day than those who do not smoke.

Intake recommendations for vitamin C and other nutrients are provided in the Dietary Reference Intakes (DRIs) developed by the Food and Nutrition Board (FNB) at the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, an Medicine [8]. DRI is the general term for a set of reference values that are used for planning and assessing nutrient intakes of healthy people. These values include the following:

    Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA): Average daily level of intake sufficient to meet the nutrient requirements of nearly all (97%–98%) healthy individuals; often used to plan nutritionally adequate diets for individuals
    Adequate Intake (AI): Intake at this level is assumed to ensure nutritional adequacy; established when evidence is insufficient to develop an RDA
    Estimated Average Requirement (EAR): Average daily level of intake estimated to meet the requirements of 50% of healthy individuals; usually used to assess the nutrient intakes of groups of people and to plan nutritionally adequate diets for them; can also be used to assess the nutrient intakes of individuals
    Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL): Maximum daily intake unlikely to cause adverse health effects

Table 1 lists the current RDAs for vitamin C [8]. The RDAs for vitamin C are based on its known physiological and antioxidant functions in white blood cells and are much higher than the amount required for protection from deficiency [4,8,12]. For infants from birth to 12 months, the FNB established AIs for vitamin C that are equivalent to the mean intake of vitamin C in healthy, breastfed infants.
Table 1: Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDAs) for Vitamin C in Milligrams (mg) [8] Age 	Male 	Female 	Pregnancy 	Lactation
0–6 months 	40 mg* 	40 mg* 		
7–12 months 	50 mg* 	50 mg* 		
1–3 years 	15 mg 	15 mg 		
4–8 years 	25 mg 	25 mg 		
9–13 years 	45 mg 	45 mg 		
14–18 years 	75 mg 	65 mg 	80 mg 	115 mg
19+ years 	90 mg 	75 mg 	85 mg 	120 mg
People who
smoke 	Individuals who smoke require 35 mg/day
more vitamin C than poeple who do not smoke.

* Adequate Intake (AI)
Sources of Vitamin C
Food

The best sources of vitamin C are fruits and vegetables, especially citrus fruits, red and green peppers, kiwifruit, broccoli, strawberries, and Brussels sprouts. Orange juice, grapefruit juice, and tomato juice also contain large amounts of vitamin C, and vitamin C is added to some breakfast cereals. Vitamin C is water soluble and susceptible to heat, so cooking can reduce the vitamin C content of food.

Fruits and vegetables are the best sources of vitamin C (see Table 2) [13]. Citrus fruits, tomatoes and tomato juice, and potatoes are major contributors of vitamin C to the American diet [8]. Other good food sources include red and green peppers, kiwifruit, broccoli, strawberries, Brussels sprouts, and cantaloupe [8,13]. Although vitamin C is not naturally present in grains, it is added to some fortified breakfast cereals. The vitamin C content of food may be reduced by prolonged storage and by cooking because ascorbic acid is water soluble and is destroyed by heat [6,8]. Steaming or microwaving may lessen cooking losses. Fortunately, many of the best food sources of vitamin C, such as fruits and vegetables, are usually consumed raw. Consuming five varied servings of fruits and vegetables a day can provide more than 200 mg of vitamin C.
Table 2: Vitamin C Content of Selected Foods [13] Food 	Milligrams (mg) per serving 	Percent (%) DV*
Red pepper, sweet, raw, ½ cup 	95 	106
Orange juice, ¾ cup 	93 	103
Orange, 1 medium 	70 	78
Grapefruit juice, ¾ cup 	70 	78
Kiwifruit, 1 medium 	64 	71
Green pepper, sweet, raw, ½ cup 	60 	67
Broccoli, cooked, ½ cup 	51 	57
Strawberries, fresh, sliced, ½ cup 	49 	54
Brussels sprouts, cooked, ½ cup 	48 	53
Grapefruit, ½ medium 	39 	43
Broccoli, raw, ½ cup 	39 	43
Tomato juice, ¾ cup 	33 	37
Cantaloupe, ½ cup 	29 	32
Cabbage, cooked, ½ cup 	28 	31
Cauliflower, raw, ½ cup 	26 	29
Potato, baked, 1 medium 	17 	19
Tomato, raw, 1 medium 	17 	19
Spinach, cooked, ½ cup 	9 	10
Green peas, frozen, cooked, ½ cup 	8 	9

*DV = Daily Value. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) developed DVs to help consumers compare the nutrient contents of foods and dietary supplements within the context of a total diet. The DV for vitamin C is 90 mg for adults and children age 4 years and older [14]. FDA does not require food labels to list vitamin C content unless vitamin C has been added to the food. Foods providing 20% or more of the DV are considered to be high sources of a nutrient, but foods providing lower percentages of the DV also contribute to a healthful diet.

The U.S. Department of Agriculture's (USDA's) FoodData Central lists the nutrient content of many foods and provides a comprehensive list of foods containing vitamin C arranged by nutrient content and by food name.
Dietary supplements

Vitamin C may be present in a number of different forms in supplements, although ascorbic acid is the most common form. The ascorbic acid used in supplements has a bioavailability that is equivalent to that of the ascorbic acid that occurs naturally in foods.

Supplements typically contain vitamin C in the form of ascorbic acid, which has equivalent bioavailability to that of naturally occurring ascorbic acid in foods, such as orange juice and broccoli [11,15,16]. Other forms of vitamin C supplements include sodium ascorbate; calcium ascorbate; other mineral ascorbates; ascorbic acid with bioflavonoids; and combination products, such as Ester-C, which contains calcium ascorbate, dehydroascorbate, calcium threonate, xylonate, and lyxonate [17].

A few studies in humans have examined whether bioavailability differs among the various forms of supplemental vitamin C. In one study, Ester-C and ascorbic acid produced the same vitamin C plasma concentrations, but Ester-C produced significantly higher vitamin C concentrations in leukocytes 24 hours after ingestion [18]. Another study found no differences in plasma vitamin C levels or urinary excretion of vitamin C among three different vitamin C sources: ascorbic acid, Ester-C, and ascorbic acid with bioflavonoids [17]. These findings, coupled with the relatively low cost of ascorbic acid, led the authors to conclude that simple ascorbic acid is the preferred source of supplemental vitamin C [17].
Vitamin C Intakes and Status

According to data from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, most people in the United States have sufficient intakes of vitamin C.

According to the 2001–2002 National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES), mean intakes of vitamin C from food and beverages are 105.2 mg/day for adult males and 83.6 mg/day for adult females, meeting the currently established RDA for most nonsmoking adults [19]. Mean intakes for children and adolescents age 1 to 18 years range from 75.6 mg/day to 100 mg/day, also meeting the RDA for these age groups [19]. Although the 2001–2002 NHANES analysis did not include data for breastfed infants and toddlers, breastmilk is considered an adequate source of vitamin C [8,11]. Use of vitamin C-containing supplements is also relatively common, adding to the total vitamin C intake from food and beverages. NHANES data from 1999–2000 indicate that approximately 35% of adults take multivitamin supplements (which typically contain vitamin C) and 12% take a separate vitamin C supplement [20]. According to 1999–2002 NHANES data, approximately 29% of children take some form of dietary supplement that contains vitamin C [21].
Vitamin C Deficiency

Vitamin C deficiency causes scurvy, but this condition is rare in developed countries. The signs and symptoms of scurvy can appear within 1 month of consuming less than about 10 mg/day of vitamin C. The lack of vitamin C impairs collagen synthesis, weakening connective tissues. This can lead to petechiae, ecchymoses, purpura, joint pain, poor wound healing, hyperkeratosis, and corkscrew hairs. Without treatment, scurvy can be fatal.

Acute vitamin C deficiency leads to scurvy [7,8,12]. The timeline for the development of scurvy varies, depending on vitamin C body stores, but signs can appear within 1 month of little or no vitamin C intake (below about 10 mg/day) [6,7,22,23]. Initial symptoms can include fatigue (probably the result of impaired carnitine biosynthesis), malaise, and inflammation of the gums [4,12]. As vitamin C deficiency progresses, collagen synthesis becomes impaired and connective tissues become weakened, causing petechiae, ecchymoses, purpura, joint pain, poor wound healing, hyperkeratosis, and corkscrew hairs [1,2,4,6-8]. Additional signs of scurvy include depression as well as swollen, bleeding gums and loosening or loss of teeth due to tissue and capillary fragility [6,8,9]. Iron deficiency anemia can also occur due to increased bleeding and decreased nonheme iron absorption secondary to low vitamin C intake [6,12]. In children, bone disease can be present [6]. Left untreated, scurvy is fatal [6,9].

Until the end of the 18th century, many sailors who ventured on long ocean voyages, with little or no vitamin C intake, contracted or died from scurvy. During the mid-1700s, Sir James Lind, a British Navy surgeon, conducted experiments and determined that eating citrus fruits or juices could cure scurvy, although scientists did not prove that ascorbic acid was the active component until 1932 [24-26].

Today, vitamin C deficiency and scurvy are rare in developed countries [8]. Overt deficiency symptoms occur only if vitamin C intake falls below approximately 10 mg/day for many weeks [5-8,22,23]. Vitamin C deficiency is uncommon in developed countries but can still occur in people with limited food variety.
Groups at Risk of Vitamin C Inadequacy

Certain groups of people are more likely than others to have vitamin C inadequacy, which occurs when intakes fall below the Recommended Dietary Allowance but are still above 10 mg/day. These include people who smoke and people who are exposed to secondhand smoke, infants who are fed evaporated or boiled milk, people who consume a limited variety of food, and people with malabsorption and certain chronic diseases.

Vitamin C inadequacy can occur with intakes that fall below the RDA but are above the amount required to prevent overt deficiency (approximately 10 mg/day). The following groups are more likely than others to be at risk of obtaining insufficient amounts of vitamin C.
People who smoke and those exposed to secondhand smoke

Studies consistently show that people who smoke have lower plasma and leukocyte vitamin C levels than people who do not smoke, due in part to increased oxidative stress [8]. For this reason, the FNB concluded that people who smoke need 35 mg more vitamin C per day than people who do not smoke [8]. Exposure to secondhand smoke also decreases vitamin C levels. Although the FNB was unable to establish a specific vitamin C requirement for people who are regularly exposed to secondhand smoke, these individuals should ensure that they meet the RDA for vitamin C [4,8].
Infants fed evaporated or boiled milk

Most infants in developed countries are fed breastmilk and/or infant formula, both of which supply adequate amounts of vitamin C [8,11]. For many reasons, feeding infants evaporated or boiled cow's milk is not recommended. This practice can cause vitamin C deficiency because cow's milk naturally has very little vitamin C and heat can destroy vitamin C [6,13].
Individuals with limited food variety

Although fruits and vegetables are the best sources of vitamin C, many other foods have small amounts of this nutrient. Thus, through a varied diet, most people should be able to meet the vitamin C RDA or at least obtain enough to prevent scurvy. People who have limited food variety—including some older, impoverished individuals who prepare their own food; people who abuse alcohol or drugs; food faddists; people with mental illness; and, occasionally, children—might not obtain sufficient vitamin C [4,6-9,12].
People with malabsorption and certain chronic diseases

Some medical conditions can reduce the absorption of vitamin C and/or increase the amount needed by the body. People with severe intestinal malabsorption or cachexia and some cancer patients might be at increased risk of vitamin C inadequacy [27]. Low vitamin C concentrations can also occur in patients with end-stage renal disease who are on chronic hemodialysis [28].
Vitamin C and Health

Because vitamin C acts as an antioxidant and plays a role in immune function, it has been promoted as a means to help prevent and/or treat numerous health conditions. This section focuses on the following diseases and disorders in which vitamin C might play a role: cancer (including prevention and treatment), CVD, age-related macular degeneration (AMD) and cataracts, and the common cold.
Cancer prevention

Case-control studies have reported that people with high dietary vitamin C intakes have a lower risk of certain cancers, and people with cancer have lower plasma concentrations of vitamin C than those who do not have cancer. While these findings suggest that vitamin C may play a role in cancer prevention, the evidence from other studies is not conclusive. The results from prospective cohort studies are inconsistent, and most randomized controlled trials have found that vitamin C supplementation alone or with other nutrients does not affect the risk of cancer.

Epidemiologic evidence suggests that higher consumption of fruits and vegetables is associated with lower risk of most types of cancer, perhaps, in part, due to their high vitamin C content [1,2]. Vitamin C can limit the formation of carcinogens, such as nitrosamines [2,29], in vivo; modulate immune response [2,4]; and, through its antioxidant function, possibly attenuate oxidative damage that can lead to cancer [1].

Most case-control studies have found an inverse association between dietary vitamin C intake and cancers of the lung, breast, colon or rectum, stomach, oral cavity, larynx or pharynx, and esophagus [2,4]. Plasma concentrations of vitamin C are also lower in people with cancer than in those who do not  have cancer [2].

However, evidence from prospective cohort studies is inconsistent, possibly due to varying intakes of vitamin C among studies. In a cohort of 82,234 women age 33 to 60 years from the Nurses' Health Study, consumption of an average of 205 mg/day of vitamin C from food (highest quintile of intake) compared with an average of 70 mg/day (lowest quintile of intake) was associated with a 63% lower risk of breast cancer among premenopausal women with a family history of breast cancer [30]. Conversely, Kushi and colleagues did not observe a significantly lower risk of breast cancer among postmenopausal women who consumed at least 198 mg/day (highest quintile of intake) of vitamin C from food compared with those who consumed less than 87 mg/day (lowest quintile of intake) [31]. A review by Carr and Frei concluded that in the majority of prospective cohort studies that did not report a significantly lower cancer risk, most participants had relatively high vitamin C intakes, with intakes higher than 86 mg/day in the lowest quintiles [2]. Studies that reported significantly lower cancer risks found these associations in individuals with vitamin C intakes of at least 80 to 110 mg/day, a range associated with close to vitamin C tissue saturation [2,22,32].

Evidence from most randomized controlled trials suggests that vitamin C supplementation, usually in combination with other micronutrients, does not affect cancer risk. In the Supplémentation en Vitamines et Minéraux Antioxydants (SU.VI.MAX) study, a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial,13,017 healthy French adults received antioxidant supplementation with 120 mg ascorbic acid, 30 mg vitamin E, 6 mg beta-carotene, 100 mcg selenium, and 20 mg zinc, or placebo [33]. After a median follow-up time of 7.5 years, antioxidant supplementation lowered the total cancer incidence in men but not in women. In addition, baseline antioxidant status was related to cancer risk in men but not in women [34]. Supplements of 500 mg/day vitamin C plus 400 International Units (IU) vitamin E every other day for a mean follow-up period of 8 years failed to reduce the risk of prostate or total cancer compared with placebo in middle-aged and older men who participated in the Physicians' Health Study II [35]. Similar findings were reported in women who participated in the Women's Antioxidant Cardiovascular Study [36]. Compared with placebo, supplementation with vitamin C (500 mg/day) for an average of 9.4 years had no significant effect on total cancer incidence or cancer mortality. In a large intervention trial conducted in Linxian, China, daily supplements of vitamin C (120 mg) plus molybdenum (30 mcg) for 5 to 6 years did not significantly affect the risk of developing esophageal or gastric cancer [37]. Moreover, during 10 years of follow-up, this supplementation regimen failed to significantly affect total morbidity or mortality from esophageal, gastric, or other cancers [38]. A 2008 review of vitamin C and other antioxidant supplements for the prevention of gastrointestinal cancers found no convincing evidence that vitamin C (or beta-carotene, vitamin A, or vitamin E) prevents gastrointestinal cancers [39]. A similar review by Coulter and colleagues found that vitamin C supplementation, in combination with vitamin E, had no significant effect on the risk of death due to cancer in healthy individuals [40].

At this time, the evidence is inconsistent on whether dietary vitamin C intake affects cancer risk. Results from most clinical trials suggest that modest vitamin C supplementation alone or with other nutrients offers no benefit in the prevention of cancer.

A substantial limitation in interpreting many of these studies is that investigators did not measure vitamin C concentrations before or after supplementation. Plasma and tissue concentrations of vitamin C are tightly controlled in humans. At daily intakes of 100 mg or higher, cells appear to be saturated, and at intakes of at least 200 mg, plasma concentrations increase only marginally [2,10,22,31,37]. If subjects' vitamin C levels were already close to saturation at study entry, supplementation would be expected to have made little or no difference to measured outcomes [22,23,41,42].
Cancer treatment

Studies have investigated whether vitamin C, administered intravenously or as a dietary supplement, can provide clinical benefits in patients with cancer, but the results have been mixed. The discrepancies in study findings may be due to the route of administration, as intravenous vitamin C can produce plasma concentrations that are far higher than those produced by oral administration, but more research is needed.

During the 1970s, studies by Cameron, Campbell, and Pauling suggested that high-dose vitamin C has beneficial effects on quality of life and survival time in patients with terminal cancer [43,44]. However, some subsequent studies—including a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial by Moertel and colleagues at the Mayo Clinic [45]—did not support these findings. In the Moertel study, patients with advanced colorectal cancer who received 10 g/day vitamin C fared no better than those who received a placebo. The authors of a 2003 review that assessed the effects of vitamin C in patients with advanced cancer concluded that vitamin C confers no significant survival benefit [40].

Emerging research suggests that the route of vitamin C administration (intravenous [IV] vs. oral) could explain the conflicting findings [1,46,47]. Most intervention trials, including the one conducted by Moertel and colleagues, used only oral administration, whereas Cameron and colleagues used a combination of oral and IV administration. Oral administration of vitamin C, even of very large doses, can raise plasma vitamin C concentrations to a maximum of only 220 micromoles/L, whereas IV administration can produce plasma concentrations as high as 26,000 micromoles/L [47,48]. Concentrations of this magnitude are selectively cytotoxic to tumor cells in vitro [1,67]. Research in mice suggests that pharmacologic doses of IV vitamin C might show promise in treating otherwise difficult-to-treat tumors [49]. A high concentration of vitamin C may act as a pro-oxidant and generate hydrogen peroxide that has selective toxicity toward cancer cells [49-51]. Based on these findings and a few case reports of patients with advanced cancers who had remarkably long survival times following administration of high-dose IV vitamin C, some researchers support reassessment of the use of high-dose IV vitamin C as a drug to treat cancer [3,47,49,52].

As discussed below, it is uncertain whether supplemental vitamin C and other antioxidants might interact with chemotherapy and/or radiation [53]. Therefore, individuals undergoing these procedures should consult with their oncologist prior to taking vitamin C or other antioxidant supplements, especially in high doses [54].
Cardiovascular disease

Vitamin C has a number of characteristics that suggest that it could help reduce the risk of cardiovascular disease, including the ability to prevent plaque instability in people with atherosclerosis by reducing vascular smooth muscle cell apoptosis. However, the prospective studies that have examined the associations between vitamin C intake and the risk of cardiovascular disease have produced conflicting results, and most clinical trials have not found conclusive evidence that vitamin C supplements can protect against cardiovascular disease.

Evidence from many epidemiological studies suggests that high intakes of fruits and vegetables are associated with a reduced risk of CVD [1,55,56]. This association might be partly attributable to the antioxidant content of these foods because oxidative damage, including oxidative modification of low-density lipoproteins, is a major cause of CVD [1,4,56]. In addition to its antioxidant properties, vitamin C has been shown to reduce monocyte adherence to the endothelium; improve endothelium-dependent nitric oxide production and vasodilation; and reduce vascular smooth muscle cell apoptosis, which prevents plaque instability in atherosclerosis [2,57].

Results from prospective studies that examined associations between vitamin C intake and CVD risk are conflicting [56]. In the Nurses' Health Study, a 16-year prospective study that involved 85,118 female nurses, total intake of vitamin C from both dietary and supplemental sources was inversely associated with coronary heart disease risk [58]. However, intake of vitamin C from diet alone showed no significant associations, suggesting that vitamin C supplement users might be at lower risk of coronary heart disease. A much smaller study indicated that postmenopausal women with diabetes who took at least 300 mg/day vitamin C supplements were more likely to die from CVD [59].

A prospective study in 20,649 British adults found that those in the top quartile of baseline plasma vitamin C concentrations had a 42% lower risk of stroke than those in the bottom quartile [60]. In male physicians who participated in the Physicians' Health Study, use of vitamin C supplements for a mean of 5.5 years was not associated with a significant decrease in total CVD mortality or coronary heart disease mortality [61]. A pooled analysis of nine prospective studies that included 293,172 subjects who were free of coronary heart disease at baseline found that people who took at least 700 mg/day of supplemental vitamin C had a 25% lower risk of coronary heart disease incidence than those who took no supplemental vitamin C [62]. The authors of a 2008 meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies, including 14 studies reporting on vitamin C for a median follow-up of 10 years, concluded that dietary, but not supplemental, intake of vitamin C is inversely associated with coronary heart disease risk [55].

Results from most clinical intervention trials have failed to show a beneficial effect of vitamin C supplementation on the primary or secondary prevention of CVD. In the Women's Antioxidant Cardiovascular Study, a secondary prevention trial that involved 8,171 women age 40 years or older with a history of CVD, supplementation with 500 mg/day vitamin C for a mean of 9.4 years showed no overall effect on cardiovascular events [63]. Similarly, vitamin C supplementation (500 mg/day) for a mean follow-up of 8 years had no effect on major cardiovascular events in male physicians who were enrolled in the Physicians' Health Study II [64].

Other clinical trials have examined the effects of supplements that combine vitamin C with other antioxidants, such as vitamin E and beta-carotene, making it more difficult to isolate the potential contribution of vitamin C alone. The SU.VI.MAX study examined the effects of a combination of vitamin C (120 mg/day), vitamin E (30 mg/day), beta-carotene (6 mg/day), selenium (100 mcg/day), and zinc (20 mg/day) in 13,017 French adults from the general population [33]. After a median follow-up time of 7.5 years, the combined supplements had no effect on ischemic CVD in either men or women. In the Women's Angiographic Vitamin and Estrogen study, which involved 423 postmenopausal women with at least one coronary stenosis of 15% to 75%, supplements of 500 mg vitamin C plus 400 IU vitamin E twice per day not only provided no cardiovascular benefit but significantly increased all-cause mortality compared with placebo [65].

The authors of a 2006 meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials concluded that antioxidant supplements (vitamins C and E and beta-carotene or selenium) do not affect the progression of atherosclerosis [66]. Similarly, a systematic review of vitamin C's effects on the prevention and treatment of CVD found that vitamin C did not have favorable effects on CVD prevention [67]. Since then, researchers have published follow-up data from the Linxian trial, a population nutrition intervention trial conducted in China [38]. In this trial, daily vitamin C supplements (120 mg) plus molybdenum (30 mcg) for 5 to 6 years significantly reduced the risk of cerebrovascular deaths by 8% during 10 years of follow-up after the end of the active intervention.

Although the Linxian trial data suggest a possible benefit, overall, the findings from most intervention trials do not provide convincing evidence that vitamin C supplements provide protection against CVD or reduce its morbidity or mortality. However, as discussed in the cancer prevention section, clinical trial data for vitamin C are limited by the fact that plasma and tissue concentrations of vitamin C are tightly controlled in humans. If subjects' vitamin C levels were already close to saturation at study entry, supplementation would be expected to have made little or no difference to measured outcomes [22,23,41,42].
Age-related macular degeneration and cataracts

Some studies have suggested that high intakes of vitamin C may reduce the risk of age-related macular degeneration or cataracts. Data from clinical trials are currently limited, and the available evidence does not indicate that vitamin C, taken alone or with other antioxidants, affects the risk of developing these conditions. However, clinical evidence indicates that people who have age-related macular degeneration and take antioxidant supplements that include vitamin C have a lower risk of progressing to advanced age-related macular degeneration.

AMD and cataracts are two of the leading causes of vision loss in older individuals. Oxidative stress might contribute to the etiology of both conditions. Thus, researchers have hypothesized that vitamin C and other antioxidants play a role in the development and/or treatment of these diseases.

A population-based cohort study in the Netherlands found that adults age 55 years or older who had high dietary intakes of vitamin C, beta-carotene, zinc, and vitamin E had a reduced risk of AMD [68]. However, most prospective studies do not support these findings [69]. The authors of a 2007 systematic review and meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies and randomized controlled trials concluded that the current evidence does not support a role for vitamin C and other antioxidants, including antioxidant supplements, in the primary prevention of early AMD [70].

Although research has not shown that antioxidants play a role in preventing AMD development, evidence suggests that they help slow AMD progression [71]. The Age-Related Eye Disease Study (AREDS), a large, randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trial, evaluated the effect of high doses of selected antioxidants (500 mg vitamin C, 400 IU vitamin E, 15 mg beta-carotene, 80 mg zinc, and 2 mg copper) on the development of advanced AMD in 3,597 older individuals with varying degrees of AMD [72]. After an average follow-up period of 6.3 years, participants at high risk of developing advanced AMD (i.e., those with intermediate AMD or those with advanced AMD in one eye) who received the antioxidant supplements had a 28% lower risk of progressing to advanced AMD than participants who received a placebo. A follow-up AREDS2 study confirmed the value of this and similar supplement formulations in reducing the progression of AMD over a median follow-up period of 5 years [73].

High dietary intakes of vitamin C and higher plasma ascorbate concentrations have been associated with a lower risk of cataract formation in some studies [2,4]. In a 5-year prospective cohort study conducted in Japan, higher dietary vitamin C intake was associated with a reduced risk of developing cataracts in a cohort of more than 30,000 adults age 45 to 64 years [74]. Results from two case-control studies indicate that vitamin C intakes greater than 300 mg/day reduce the risk of cataract formation by 70% to 75% [2,4]. The use of vitamin C supplements, on the other hand, was associated with a 25% higher risk of age-related cataract extraction among a cohort of 24,593 Swedish women age 49 to 83 years [75]. These findings applied to study participants who took relatively high doses of vitamin C supplements (approximately 1,000 mg/day) and not to those who took multivitamins that contained substantially less vitamin C (approximately 60 mg/day).

Data from clinical trials are limited. In one study, Chinese adults who took daily supplements of 120 mg vitamin C plus 30 mcg molybdenum for 5 years did not have a significantly lower cataract risk [76]. However, adults age 65 to 74 years who received 180 mg vitamin C plus 30 mcg molybdenum combined with other nutrients in a multivitamin/mineral supplement had a 43% lower risk of developing nuclear cataracts than those who received a placebo [76]. In the AREDS study, older individuals who received supplements of 500 mg vitamin C, 400 IU vitamin E, and 15 mg beta-carotene for an average of 6.3 years did not have a significantly lower risk of developing cataracts or of cataract progression than those who received a placebo [77]. The AREDS2 study, which also tested formulations that contained 500 mg vitamin C, confirmed these findings [78].

Overall, the currently available evidence does not indicate that vitamin C, taken alone or with other antioxidants, affects the risk of developing AMD, although evidence indicates that the AREDS formulations might slow AMD progression in people at high risk of developing advanced AMD.
The common cold

Regular vitamin C intake at doses of at least 200 mg/day may reduce the incidence of the common cold in people who exercise intensely, are exposed to cold environments, or have marginal vitamin C status. However, in the general population, taking vitamin C prophylactically does not appear to reduce the risk of the common cold, although it does appear to modestly reduce the duration of the cold and ameliorate the symptoms. Taking vitamin C after the onset of cold symptoms does not appear to affect cold duration or symptom severity.

In the 1970s Linus Pauling suggested that vitamin C could successfully treat and/or prevent the common cold [79]. Results of subsequent controlled studies have been inconsistent, resulting in confusion and controversy, although public interest in the subject remains high [80,81].

A 2007 Cochrane Review examined placebo-controlled trials that involved the use of at least 200 mg/day vitamin C taken either continuously as a prophylactic treatment or after the onset of cold symptoms [81]. Prophylactic use of vitamin C did not significantly reduce the risk of developing a cold in the general population. However, in trials involving marathon runners, skiers, and soldiers who were exposed to extreme physical exercise and/or cold environments, prophylactic use of vitamin C in doses ranging from 250 mg/day to 1 g/day reduced cold incidence by 50%. In the general population, the use of prophylactic vitamin C modestly reduced cold duration by 8% in adults and 14% in children. When taken after the onset of cold symptoms, vitamin C did not affect cold duration or symptom severity.

Overall, the evidence to date suggests that regular intakes of vitamin C at doses of at least 200 mg/day do not reduce the incidence of the common cold in the general population, but such intakes might be helpful in people exposed to extreme physical exercise or cold environments and those with marginal vitamin C status, such as the older adults and people who regularly smoke [81-83]. The regular use of vitamin C supplements might shorten the duration of the common cold and ameliorate symptom severity in the general population [80,83], possibly due to the antihistamine effect of high-dose vitamin C [84]. However, taking vitamin C after the onset of cold symptoms does not appear to be beneficial [81].
Health Risks from Excessive Vitamin C

In general, vitamin C has low toxicity, and high intakes of vitamin C do not cause serious adverse effects. However, high doses of vitamin C can lead to diarrhea, nausea, abdominal cramps, and other gastrointestinal disturbances. There are some concerns surrounding high vitamin C intakes, such as the formation of kidney stones and excess iron absorption, but these are not generally considered a risk in healthy individuals. The Tolerable Upper Intake Level for vitamin C ranges from 400 to 2,000 mg, depending on age.

Vitamin C has low toxicity and is not believed to cause serious adverse effects at high intakes [8]. The most common complaints are diarrhea, nausea, abdominal cramps, and other gastrointestinal disturbances due to the osmotic effect of unabsorbed vitamin C in the gastrointestinal tract [4,8].

In postmenopausal women with diabetes who participated in the Iowa Women's Health Study, supplemental (but not dietary) vitamin C intake (at least 300 mg/day) was significantly associated with a higher risk of dying from CVD [59]. The mechanism for this effect, if real, is not clear and this finding is from a subgroup of patients in an epidemiological study. No such association has been observed in any other epidemiological study, so the significance of this finding is uncertain. High vitamin C intakes also have the potential to increase urinary oxalate and uric acid excretion, which could contribute to the formation of kidney stones, especially in individuals with renal disorders [8]. However, the studies that have evaluated the effects of vitamin C intakes ranging from 30 mg to 10 g/day on urinary oxalate excretion have had conflicting results, so it is not clear whether vitamin C actually plays a role in the development of kidney stones [8,85-87]. The best evidence that vitamin C contributes to kidney stone formation is in patients with pre-existing hyperoxaluria [23].

Due to the enhancement of nonheme iron absorption by vitamin C, a theoretical concern is that high vitamin C intakes might cause excess iron absorption. In healthy individuals, this does not appear to be a concern [8]. However, in individuals with hereditary hemochromatosis, chronic consumption of high doses of vitamin C could exacerbate iron overload and result in tissue damage [4,8].

Under certain conditions, vitamin C can act as a pro-oxidant, potentially contributing to oxidative damage [8]. A few in vitro studies have suggested that by acting as a pro-oxidant, supplemental oral vitamin C could cause chromosomal and/or DNA damage and possibly contribute to the development of cancer [8,88,89]. However, other studies have not shown an increase in oxidative damage or cancer risk with high intakes of vitamin C [8,90].

Other reported effects of high intakes of vitamin C include reduced vitamin B12 and copper levels, accelerated metabolism or excretion of ascorbic acid, erosion of dental enamel, and allergic responses [8]. However, at least some of these conclusions were a consequence of assay artifact, and additional studies have not confirmed these observations [8].

The FNB has established ULs for vitamin C that apply to both food and supplement intakes (Table 3) [8]. Long-term intakes of vitamin C above the UL may increase the risk of adverse health effects. The ULs do not apply to individuals who are receiving vitamin C for medical treatment, but such individuals should be under the care of a physician [8].
Table 3: Tolerable Upper Intake Levels (ULs) for Vitamin C in Milligrams (mg) [8] Age 	Male 	Female 	Pregnancy 	Lactation
0–6 months 	Not possible to establish* 	Not possible to establish* 		
7–12 months 	Not possible to establish* 	Not possible to establish* 		
1–3 years 	400 mg 	400 mg 		
4–8 years 	650 mg 	650 mg 		
9–13 years 	1,200 mg 	1,200 mg 		
14–18 years 	1,800 mg 	1,800 mg 	1,800 mg 	1,800 mg
19+ years 	2,000 mg 	2,000 mg 	2,000 mg 	2,000 mg

* Formula and food should be the only sources of vitamin C for infants.
Interactions with Medications

Vitamin C supplements may interact with radiation therapy and medications, including chemotherapeutic agents and statins.

Vitamin C supplements have the potential to interact with several types of medications. A few examples are provided below. Individuals who are taking these medications on a regular basis should discuss their vitamin C intakes with their health care providers.
Chemotherapy and radiation

The safety and efficacy of using vitamin C and other antioxidants during cancer treatment is controversial [53,91,92]. Some data indicate that antioxidants might protect tumor cells from the action of radiation therapy and chemotherapeutic agents, such as cyclophosphamide, chlorambucil, carmustine, busulfan, thiotepa, and doxorubicin [54,91,93,94]. At least some of these data have been criticized because of poor study design [52]. Other data suggest that antioxidants might protect normal tissues from chemotherapy- and radiation-induced damage [91,93] and/or enhance the effectiveness of conventional cancer treatment [95]. However, due to the physiologically tight control of vitamin C, it is unclear whether oral vitamin C supplements could alter vitamin C concentrations enough to produce the suggested effects. Individuals who are undergoing chemotherapy or radiation should consult with their oncologist prior to taking vitamin C or other antioxidant supplements, especially in high doses [54].
3-Hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase inhibitors (statins)

Vitamin C, in combination with other antioxidants, may attenuate the increase in high-density lipoprotein levels that result from taking combination niacin/simvastatin (Zocor) therapy [96,97]. It is not known whether this interaction occurs with other lipid-altering regimens [54]. Health care providers should monitor lipid levels in individuals who are taking both statins and antioxidant supplements [54].
Vitamin C and Healthful Diets

In general, a person’s nutritional needs should be met primarily through the diet, including fortified foods. Dietary supplements may be useful in cases where it is not possible to meet the needs for specific nutrients through food alone, especially during certain life stages. The Dietary Guidelines for Americans offers a general description of healthy dietary patterns.

The federal government's 2020–2025 Dietary Guidelines for Americans notes that "Because foods provide an array of nutrients and other components that have benefits for health, nutritional needs should be met primarily through foods....In some cases, fortified foods and dietary supplements are useful when it is not possible otherwise to meet needs for one or more nutrients (e.g., during specific life stages such as pregnancy)."

For more information about building a healthy dietary pattern, refer to the Dietary Guidelines for Americans and the USDA's MyPlate.

The Dietary Guidelines for Americans describes a healthy dietary pattern as one that

    Includes a variety of vegetables; fruits; grains (at least half whole grains); fat-free and low-fat milk, yogurt, and cheese; and oils.
        Fruits (particularly citrus fruits), fruit juices, and many vegetables are excellent sources of vitamin C. Some ready-to-eat breakfast cereals are fortified with vitamin C.
    Includes a variety of protein-rich foods, such as lean meats, poultry, eggs, seafood, beans, peas, lentils, nuts, seeds, and soy products.
    Limits foods and beverages that are higher in added sugars, saturated fat, and sodium.
    Limits alcoholic beverages.
    Stays within your daily calorie needs.

References

    Li Y, Schellhorn HE. New developments and novel therapeutic perspectives for vitamin C. J Nutr 2007;137:2171-84. [PubMed abstract]
    Carr AC, Frei B. Toward a new recommended dietary allowance for vitamin C based on antioxidant and health effects in humans. Am J Clin Nutr 1999;69:1086-107. [PubMed abstract]
    Frei B, England L, Ames BN. Ascorbate is an outstanding antioxidant in human blood plasma. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1989;86:6377-81. [PubMed abstract]
    Jacob RA, Sotoudeh G. Vitamin C function and status in chronic disease. Nutr Clin Care 2002;5:66-74. [PubMed abstract]
    Gershoff SN. Vitamin C (ascorbic acid): new roles, new requirements? Nutr Rev 1993;51:313-26. [PubMed abstract]
    Weinstein M, Babyn P, Zlotkin S. An orange a day keeps the doctor away: scurvy in the year 2000. Pediatrics 2001;108:E55. [PubMed abstract]
    Wang AH, Still C. Old world meets modern: a case report of scurvy. Nutr Clin Pract 2007;22:445-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Institute of Medicine. Food and Nutrition Board. Dietary Reference Intakes for Vitamin C, Vitamin E, Selenium, and Carotenoids. Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 2000.
    Stephen R, Utecht T. Scurvy identified in the emergency department: a case report. J Emerg Med 2001;21:235-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Padayatty SJ, Sun H, Wang Y, Riordan HD, Hewitt SM, Katz A, Wesley RA, Levine M. Vitamin C pharmacokinetics: implications for oral and intravenous use. Ann Intern Med 2004;140:533-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Bates CJ. Bioavailability of vitamin C. Eur J Clin Nutr 1997;51 (Suppl 1):S28-33. [PubMed abstract]
    Francescone MA, Levitt J. Scurvy masquerading as leukocytoclastic vasculitis: a case report and review of the literature. Cutis 2005;76:261-6. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service. FoodData Central, 2019.
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Food Labeling: Revision of the Nutrition and Supplement Facts Labels. 2016.
    Mangels AR, Block G, Frey CM, Patterson BH, Taylor PR, Norkus EP, et al. The bioavailability to humans of ascorbic acid from oranges, orange juice and cooked broccoli is similar to that of synthetic ascorbic acid. J Nutr 1993;123:1054-61. [PubMed abstract]
    Gregory JF 3rd. Ascorbic acid bioavailability in foods and supplements. Nutr Rev 1993;51:301-3. [PubMed abstract]
    Johnston CS, Luo B. Comparison of the absorption and excretion of three commercially available sources of vitamin C. J Am Diet Assoc 1994;94:779-81. [PubMed abstract]
    Moyad MA, Combs MA, Vrablic AS, Velasquez J, Turner B, Bernal S. Vitamin C metabolites, independent of smoking status, significantly enhance leukocyte, but not plasma ascorbate concentrations. Adv Ther 2008;25:995-1009. [PubMed abstract]
    Moshfegh A, Goldman J, Cleveland L. What We Eat in America, NHANES 2001-2002: Usual Nutrient Intakes from Food Compared to Dietary Reference Intakes. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service, 2005.
    Radimer K, Bindewald B, Hughes J, Ervin B, Swanson C, Picciano MF. Dietary supplement use by US adults: data from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, 1999-2000. Am J Epidemiol 2004;160:339-49. [PubMed abstract]
    Picciano MF, Dwyer JT, Radimer KL, Wilson DH, Fisher KD, Thomas PR, et al. Dietary supplement use among infants, children, and adolescents in the United States, 1999-2002. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 2007;161:978-85. [PubMed abstract]
    Levine M, Conry-Cantilena C, Wang Y, Welch RW, Washko PW, Dhariwal KR, et al. Vitamin C pharmacokinetics in healthy volunteers: evidence for a recommended dietary allowance. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1996;93:3704-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Levine M, Rumsey SC, Daruwala R, Park JB, Wang Y. Criteria and recommendations for vitamin C intake. JAMA 1999;281:1415-23. [PubMed abstract]
    King, CG, Waugh, WA. The chemical nature of vitamin C. Science 1932;75:357-358.
    Svirbely J, Szent-Györgyi A. Hexuronic acid as the antiscorbutic factor. Nature 1932;129: 576.
    Svirbely J, Szent-Györgyi A. Hexuronic acid as the antiscorbutic factor. Nature 1932;129: 690.
    Hoffman FA. Micronutrient requirements of cancer patients. Cancer. 1985;55 (1 Suppl):295-300. [PubMed abstract]
    Deicher R, Hörl WH. Vitamin C in chronic kidney disease and hemodialysis patients. Kidney Blood Press Res 2003;26:100-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Hecht SS. Approaches to cancer prevention based on an understanding of N-nitrosamine carcinogenesis. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 1997;216:181-91. [PubMed abstract]
    Zhang S, Hunter DJ, Forman MR, Rosner BA, Speizer FE, Colditz GA, et al. Dietary carotenoids and vitamins A, C, and E and risk of breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:547-56. [PubMed abstract]
    Kushi LH, Fee RM, Sellers TA, Zheng W, Folsom AR. Intake of vitamins A, C, and E and postmenopausal breast cancer. The Iowa Women's Health Study. Am J Epidemiol 1996;144:165-74. [PubMed abstract]
    Levine M, Wang Y, Padayatty SJ, Morrow J. A new recommended dietary allowance of vitamin C for healthy young women. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2001;98:9842-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Hercberg S, Galan P, Preziosi P, Bertrais S, Mennen L, Malvy D, et al. The SU.VI.MAX Study: a randomized, placebo-controlled trial of the health effects of antioxidant vitamins and minerals. Arch Intern Med 2004;164:2335-42. [PubMed abstract]
    Galan P, Briançon S, Favier A, Bertrais S, Preziosi P, Faure H, et al. Antioxidant status and risk of cancer in the SU.VI.MAX study: is the effect of supplementation dependent on baseline levels? Br J Nutr 2005;94:125-32. [PubMed abstract]
    Gaziano JM, Glynn RJ, Christen WG, Kurth T, Belanger C, MacFadyen J, et al. Vitamins E and C in the prevention of prostate and total cancer in men: the Physicians' Health Study II randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2009;301:52-62. [PubMed abstract]
    Lin J, Cook NR, Albert C, Zaharris E, Gaziano JM, Van Denburgh M, et al. Vitamins C and E and beta carotene supplementation and cancer risk: a randomized controlled trial. J Natl Cancer Inst 2009;101:14-23. [PubMed abstract]
    Taylor PR, Li B, Dawsey SM, Li JY, Yang CS, Guo W, et al. Prevention of esophageal cancer: the nutrition intervention trials in Linxian, China. Linxian Nutrition Intervention Trials Study Group. Cancer Res 1994;54(7 Suppl):2029s-31s. [PubMed abstract]
    Qiao YL, Dawsey SM, Kamangar F, Fan JH, Abnet CC, Sun XD, et al. Total and cancer mortality after supplementation with vitamins and minerals: follow-up of the Linxian General Population Nutrition Intervention Trial. J Natl Cancer Inst 2009;101:507-18. [PubMed abstract]
    Bjelakovic G, Nikolova D, Simonetti RG, Gluud C. Antioxidant supplements for preventing gastrointestinal cancers. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2008;(3):CD004183. [PubMed abstract]
    Coulter I, Hardy M, Shekelle P, Udani J, Spar M, Oda K, et al. Effect of the supplemental use of antioxidants vitamin C, vitamin E, and coenzyme Q10 for the prevention and treatment of cancer. Evidence Report/Technology Assessment Number 75. AHRQ Publication No. 04-E003. Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, 2003. [PubMed abstract]
    Padayatty SJ, Levine M. Vitamins C and E and the prevention of preeclampsia. N Engl J Med 2006;355:1065. [PubMed abstract]
    Padayatty SJ, Levine M. Antioxidant supplements and cardiovascular disease in men. JAMA 2009;301:1336. [PubMed abstract]
    Cameron E, Campbell A. The orthomolecular treatment of cancer. II. Clinical trial of high-dose ascorbic acid supplements in advanced human cancer. Chem Biol Interact 1974;9:285-315. [PubMed abstract]
    Cameron E, Pauling L. Supplemental ascorbate in the supportive treatment of cancer: prolongation of survival times in terminal human cancer. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1976;73:3685-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Moertel CG, Fleming TR, Creagan ET, Rubin J, O'Connell MJ, Ames MM. High-dose vitamin C versus placebo in the treatment of patients with advanced cancer who have had no prior chemotherapy. A randomized double-blind comparison. N Engl J Med 1985;312:137-41. [PubMed abstract]
    Bruno EJ Jr, Ziegenfuss TN, Landis J. Vitamin C: research update. Curr Sports Med Rep 2006;5:177-81. [PubMed abstract]
    Padayatty SJ, Riordan HD, Hewitt SM, Katz A, Hoffer LJ, Levine M. Intravenously administered vitamin C as cancer therapy: three cases. CMAJ 2006;174:937-42. [PubMed abstract]
    Hoffer LJ, Levine M, Assouline S, Melnychuk D, Padayatty SJ, Rosadiuk K, et al. Phase I clinical trial of i.v. ascorbic acid in advanced malignancy. Ann Oncol 2008;19:1969-74. [PubMed abstract]
    Chen Q, Espey MG, Sun AY, Pooput C, Kirk KL, Krishna MC, et al. Pharmacologic doses of ascorbate act as a prooxidant and decrease growth of aggressive tumor xenografts in mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2008;105:11105-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Chen Q, Espey MG, Krishna MC, Mitchell JB, Corpe CP, Buettner GR, et al. Pharmacologic ascorbic acid concentrations selectively kill cancer cells: action as a pro-drug to deliver hydrogen peroxide to tissues. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2005;102:13604-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Chen Q, Espey MG, Sun AY, Lee JH, Krishna MC, Shacter E, et al. Ascorbate in pharmacologic concentrations selectively generates ascorbate radical and hydrogen peroxide in extracellular fluid in vivo. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2007;104:8749-54. [PubMed abstract]
    Levine M, Espey MG, Chen Q. Losing and finding a way at C: new promise for pharmacologic ascorbate in cancer treatment. Free Radic Biol Med 2009;47:27-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Seifried HE, Anderson DE, Sorkin BC, Costello RB. Free radicals: the pros and cons of antioxidants. Executive summary report. J Nutr 2004;134:3143S-63S. [PubMed abstract]
    Natural Medicines Comprehensive Database. Vitamin C.
    Ye Z, Song H. Antioxidant vitamins intake and the risk of coronary heart disease: meta-analysis of cohort studies. Eur J Cardiovasc Prev Rehabil 2008;15:26-34. [PubMed abstract]
    Willcox BJ, Curb JD, Rodriguez BL. Antioxidants in cardiovascular health and disease: key lessons from epidemiologic studies. Am J Cardiol 2008;101:75D-86D. [PubMed abstract]
    Honarbakhsh S, Schachter M. Vitamins and cardiovascular disease. Br J Nutr 2008:1-19. [PubMed abstract]
    Osganian SK, Stampfer MJ, Rimm E, Spiegelman D, Hu FB, Manson JE, et al. Vitamin C and risk of coronary heart disease in women. J Am Coll Cardiol 2003;42:246-52. [PubMed abstract]
    Lee DH, Folsom AR, Harnack L, Halliwell B, Jacobs DR Jr. Does supplemental vitamin C increase cardiovascular disease risk in women with diabetes? Am J Clin Nutr 2004;80:1194-200. [PubMed abstract]
    Myint PK, Luben RN, Welch AA, Bingham SA, Wareham NJ, Khaw KT. Plasma vitamin C concentrations predict risk of incident stroke over 10 y in 20 649 participants of the European Prospective Investigation into Cancer Norfolk prospective population study. Am J Clin Nutr 2008;87:64-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Muntwyler J, Hennekens CH, Manson JE, Buring JE, Gaziano JM. Vitamin supplement use in a low-risk population of US male physicians and subsequent cardiovascular mortality. Arch Intern Med 2002;162:1472-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Knekt P, Ritz J, Pereira MA, O'Reilly EJ, Augustsson K, Fraser GE, et al. Antioxidant vitamins and coronary heart disease risk: a pooled analysis of 9 cohorts. Am J Clin Nutr 2004;80:1508-20. [PubMed abstract]
    Cook NR, Albert CM, Gaziano JM, Zaharris E, MacFadyen J, Danielson E, et al. A randomized factorial trial of vitamins C and E and beta carotene in the secondary prevention of cardiovascular events in women: results from the Women's Antioxidant Cardiovascular Study. Arch Intern Med 2007;167:1610-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Sesso HD, Buring JE, Christen WG, Kurth T, Belanger C, MacFadyen J, et al. Vitamins E and C in the prevention of cardiovascular disease in men: the Physicians' Health Study II randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2008;300:2123-33. [PubMed abstract]
    Waters DD, Alderman EL, Hsia J, Howard BV, Cobb FR, Rogers WJ, et al. Effects of hormone replacement therapy and antioxidant vitamin supplements on coronary atherosclerosis in postmenopausal women: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2002;288:2432-40. [PubMed abstract]
    Bleys J, Miller ER 3rd, Pastor-Barriuso R, Appel LJ, Guallar E. Vitamin-mineral supplementation and the progression of atherosclerosis: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Am J Clin Nutr 2006;84:880-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Shekelle P, Morton S, Hardy M. Effect of supplemental antioxidants vitamin C, vitamin E, and coenzyme Q10 for the prevention and treatment of cardiovascular disease. Evidence Report/Technology Assessment No. 83 AHRQ Publication No. 03-E043. Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, 2003. [PubMed abstract]
    van Leeuwen R, Boekhoorn S, Vingerling JR, Witteman JC, Klaver CC, Hofman A, et al. Dietary intake of antioxidants and risk of age-related macular degeneration. JAMA 2005;294:3101-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Evans J. Primary prevention of age related macular degeneration. BMJ 2007;335:729. [PubMed abstract]
    Chong EW, Wong TY, Kreis AJ, Simpson JA, Guymer RH. Dietary antioxidants and primary prevention of age related macular degeneration: systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ 2007;335:755. [PubMed abstract]
    Evans JR. Antioxidant vitamin and mineral supplements for slowing the progression of age-related macular degeneration. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2006;(2):CD000254. [PubMed abstract]
    Age-Related Eye Disease Study Research Group. A randomized, placebo-controlled, clinical trial of high-dose supplementation with vitamins C and E, beta carotene, and zinc for age-related macular degeneration and vision loss: AREDS report no. 8. Arch Ophthalmol 2001;119:1417-36. [PubMed abstract]
    The Age-Related Eye Disease Study 2 (AREDS2) Research Group. Lutein + zeaxanthin and omega-3 fatty acids for age-related macular degeneration: the Age-Related Eye Disease Study 2 (AREDS2) randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2013;309:2005-15. [PubMed abstract]
    Yoshida M, Takashima Y, Inoue M, Iwasaki M, Otani T, Sasaki S; JPHC Study Group. Prospective study showing that dietary vitamin C reduced the risk of age-related cataracts in a middle-aged Japanese population. Eur J Nutr 2007;46:118-24. [PubMed abstract]
    Rautiainen S, Lindblad BE, Morgenstern R, Wolk A. Vitamin C supplements and the risk of age-related cataract: a population-based prospective cohort study in women. Am J Clin Nutr. 2010 Feb;91(2):487-93. [PubMed abstract]
    Sperduto RD, Hu TS, Milton RC, Zhao JL, Everett DF, Cheng QF, et al. The Linxian cataract studies. Two nutrition intervention trials. Arch Ophthalmol 1993;111:1246-53. [PubMed abstract]
    Age-Related Eye Disease Study Research Group. A randomized, placebo-controlled, clinical trial of high-dose supplementation with vitamins C and E and beta carotene for age-related cataract and vision loss: AREDS report no. 9. Arch Ophthalmol 2001;119:1439-52. [PubMed abstract]
    The Age-Related Eye Disease Study 2 (AREDS2) Research Group. Lutein/zeaxanthin for the treatment of age-related cataract: AREDS2 randomized trial report no. 4. JAMA Ophthalmol 2013. Online May 5. [PubMed abstract]
    Pauling L. The significance of the evidence about ascorbic acid and the common cold. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1971;68:2678-81. [PubMed abstract]
    Douglas RM, Hemilä H. Vitamin C for preventing and treating the common cold. PLoS Med 2005;2:e168. [PubMed abstract]
    Douglas RM, Hemilä H, Chalker E, Treacy B. Vitamin C for preventing and treating the common cold. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2007;(3):CD000980. [PubMed abstract]
    Wintergerst ES, Maggini S, Hornig DH. Immune-enhancing role of vitamin C and zinc and effect on clinical conditions. Ann Nutr Metab 2006;50:85-94. [PubMed abstract]
    Hemilä H. The role of vitamin C in the treatment of the common cold. Am Fam Physician 2007;76:1111, 1115. [PubMed abstract]
    Johnston CS. The antihistamine action of ascorbic acid. Subcell Biochem 1996;25:189-213. [PubMed abstract]
    Curhan GC, Willett WC, Rimm EB, Stampfer MJ. A prospective study of the intake of vitamins C and B6, and the risk of kidney stones in men. J Urol 1996;155:1847-51. [PubMed abstract]
    Curhan GC, Willett WC, Speizer FE, Stampfer MJ. Intake of vitamins B6 and C and the risk of kidney stones in women. J Am Soc Nephrol 1999;10:840-5. [PubMed abstract]
    Taylor EN, Stampfer MJ, Curhan GC. Dietary factors and the risk of incident kidney stones in men: new insights after 14 years of follow-up. J Am Soc Nephrol 2004;15:3225-32. [PubMed abstract]
    Lee SH, Oe T, Blair IA. Vitamin C-induced decomposition of lipid hydroperoxides to endogenous genotoxins. Science 2001;292:2083-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Podmore ID, Griffiths HR, Herbert KE, Mistry N, Mistry P, Lunec J. Vitamin C exhibits pro-oxidant properties. Nature 1998;392:559. [PubMed abstract]
    Carr A, Frei B. Does vitamin C act as a pro-oxidant under physiological conditions? FASEB J 1999 Jun;13:1007-24. [PubMed abstract]
    Lawenda BD, Kelly KM, Ladas EJ, Sagar SM, Vickers A, Blumberg JB. Should supplemental antioxidant administration be avoided during chemotherapy and radiation therapy? J Natl Cancer Inst 2008;100:773-83. [PubMed abstract]
    Ladas EJ, Jacobson JS, Kennedy DD, Teel K, Fleischauer A, Kelly KM. Antioxidants and cancer therapy: a systematic review. J Clin Oncol 2004;22:517-28. [PubMed abstract]
    Block KI, Koch AC, Mead MN, Tothy PK, Newman RA, Gyllenhaal C. Impact of antioxidant supplementation on chemotherapeutic efficacy: a systematic review of the evidence from randomized controlled trials. Cancer Treat Rev 2007;33:407-18. [PubMed abstract]
    Heaney ML, Gardner JR, Karasavvas N, Golde DW, Scheinberg DA, Smith EA, et al. Vitamin C antagonizes the cytotoxic effects of antineoplastic drugs. Cancer Res 2008;68:8031-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Prasad KN. Rationale for using high-dose multiple dietary antioxidants as an adjunct to radiation therapy and chemotherapy. J Nutr 2004;134:3182S-3S. [PubMed abstract]
    Brown BG, Zhao XQ, Chait A, Fisher LD, Cheung MC, Morse JS, et al. Simvastatin and niacin, antioxidant vitamins, or the combination for the prevention of coronary disease. N Engl J Med 2001;345:1583-92. [PubMed abstract]
    Cheung MC, Zhao XQ, Chait A, Albers JJ, Brown BG. Antioxidant supplements block the response of HDL to simvastatin-niacin therapy in patients with coronary artery disease and low HDL. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 2001;21:1320-6. [PubMed abstract]

Disclaimer

This fact sheet by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Office of Dietary Supplements (ODS) provides information that should not take the place of medical advice. We encourage you to talk to your health care providers (doctor, registered dietitian, pharmacist, etc.) about your interest in, questions about, or use of dietary supplements and what may be best for your overall health. Any mention in this publication of a specific product or service, or recommendation from an organization or professional society, does not represent an endorsement by ODS of that product, service, or expert advice.

Updated: July 31, 2025


 Vitamin D: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals (original version)
Vitamin D: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals
Table of Contents

    Introduction
    Recommended Intakes
    Sources of Vitamin D
    Vitamin D Intakes and Status
    Vitamin D Deficiency
    Groups at Risk of Vitamin D Inadequacy
    Vitamin D and Health
    Health Risks from Excessive Vitamin D
    Interactions with Medications
    Vitamin D and Healthful Diets
    References
    Disclaimer

For information on vitamin D and COVID-19, see Dietary Supplements in the Time of COVID-19.
Introduction

Vitamin D (also referred to as calciferol) is a fat-soluble vitamin that is naturally present in a few foods, added to others, and available as a dietary supplement. It is also produced endogenously when ultraviolet (UV) rays from sunlight strike the skin and trigger vitamin D synthesis.

Vitamin D obtained from sun exposure, foods, and supplements is biologically inert and must undergo two hydroxylations in the body for activation. The first hydroxylation, which occurs in the liver, converts vitamin D to 25-hydroxyvitamin D [25(OH)D], also known as calcidiol. The second hydroxylation occurs primarily in the kidney and forms the physiologically active 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D [1,25(OH)2D], also known as calcitriol [1].

Vitamin D promotes calcium absorption in the gut and maintains adequate serum calcium and phosphate concentrations to enable normal bone mineralization and to prevent hypocalcemic tetany (involuntary contraction of muscles, leading to cramps and spasms). It is also needed for bone growth and bone remodeling by osteoblasts and osteoclasts [1-3]. Without sufficient vitamin D, bones can become thin, brittle, or misshapen. Vitamin D sufficiency prevents rickets in children and osteomalacia in adults. Together with calcium, vitamin D also helps protect older adults from osteoporosis.

Vitamin D has other roles in the body, including reduction of inflammation as well as modulation of such processes as cell growth, neuromuscular and immune function, and glucose metabolism [1-3]. Many genes encoding proteins that regulate cell proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis are modulated in part by vitamin D. Many tissues have vitamin D receptors, and some convert 25(OH)D to 1,25(OH)2D.

In foods and dietary supplements, vitamin D has two main forms, D2 (ergocalciferol) and D3 (cholecalciferol), that differ chemically only in their side-chain structures. Both forms are well absorbed in the small intestine. Absorption occurs by simple passive diffusion and by a mechanism that involves intestinal membrane carrier proteins [4]. The concurrent presence of fat in the gut enhances vitamin D absorption, but some vitamin D is absorbed even without dietary fat. Neither aging nor obesity alters vitamin D absorption from the gut [4].
Assessing vitamin D status

Serum concentration of 25(OH)D is the main indicator of vitamin D status. However, the serum concentrations of 25(OH)D that are associated with vitamin D deficiency have not been definitively identified. The Food and Nutrition Board at the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine states that levels of 50 nmol/L (20 ng/mL) or more are sufficient for most people, and that the risk of deficiency increases at serum concentrations of less than 30 nmol/L (12 ng/mL).

Serum concentration of 25(OH)D is currently the main indicator of vitamin D status. It reflects vitamin D produced endogenously and that obtained from foods and supplements [1]. In serum, 25(OH)D has a fairly long circulating half-life of 15 days [1]. Serum concentrations of 25(OH)D are reported in both nanomoles per liter (nmol/L) and nanograms per milliliter (ng/mL). One nmol/L is equal to 0.4 ng/mL, and 1 ng/mL is equal to 2.5 nmol/L.

Assessing vitamin D status by measuring serum 25(OH)D concentrations is complicated by the considerable variability of the available assays (the two most common ones involve antibodies or chromatography) used by laboratories that conduct the analyses [5,6]. As a result, a finding can be falsely low or falsely high, depending on the assay used and the laboratory. The international Vitamin D Standardization Program has developed procedures for standardizing the laboratory measurement of 25(OH)D to improve clinical and public health practice [5,7-10].

In contrast to 25(OH)D, circulating 1,25(OH)2D is generally not a good indicator of vitamin D status because it has a short half-life measured in hours, and serum levels are tightly regulated by parathyroid hormone, calcium, and phosphate [1]. Levels of 1,25(OH)2D do not typically decrease until vitamin D deficiency is severe [2].

Although 25(OH)D functions as a biomarker of exposure, the extent to which 25(OH)D levels also serve as a biomarker of effect on the body (i.e., relating to health status or outcomes) is not clear [1,3].

Researchers have not definitively identified serum concentrations of 25(OH)D associated with deficiency (e.g., rickets), adequacy for bone health, and overall health. After reviewing data on vitamin D needs, an expert committee of the Food and Nutrition Board (FNB) at the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (NASEM) concluded that people are at risk of vitamin D deficiency at serum 25(OH)D concentrations less than 30 nmol/L (12 ng/mL; see Table 1 for definitions of deficiency and inadequacy) [1]. Some people are potentially at risk of inadequacy at 30 to 50 nmol/L (12–20 ng/mL). Levels of 50 nmol/L (20 ng/mL) or more are sufficient for most people. The FNB also noted that serum concentrations greater than 125 nmol/L (50 ng/mL) can be associated with adverse effects [1] (Table 1). The Endocrine Society has not identified 25(OH)D concentrations associated with vitamin D sufficiency, insufficiency, and deficiency and does not recommend routine testing of 25(OH)D concentrations in healthy individuals [11,12].
Table 1: Serum 25-Hydroxyvitamin D [25(OH)D] Concentrations and Health [1] nmol/L* 	ng/mL* 	Health status
<30 	<12 	Associated with vitamin D deficiency, which can lead to rickets in infants and children and osteomalacia in adults
30 to <50 	12 to <20 	Generally considered inadequate for bone and overall health in healthy individuals
≥50 	≥20 	Generally considered adequate for bone and overall health in healthy individuals
>125 	>50 	Linked to potential adverse effects, particularly at >150 nmol/L (>60 ng/mL)
*Serum concentrations of 25(OH)D are reported in both nanomoles per liter (nmol/L) and nanograms per milliliter (ng/mL). One nmol/L = 0.4 ng/mL, and 1 ng/mL = 2.5 nmol/L.

Optimal serum concentrations of 25(OH)D for bone and general health have not been established because they are likely to vary by stage of life, by race and ethnicity, and with each physiological measure used [1,13,14]. In addition, although 25(OH)D levels rise in response to increased vitamin D intake, the relationship is nonlinear [1]. The amount of increase varies, for example, by baseline serum levels and duration of supplementation.
Recommended Intakes

The Food and Nutrition Board at the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine has established Recommended Dietary Allowances and Adequate Intakes for vitamin D. These values range from 15 to 20 mcg (600–800 IU) for adults and from 10 to 15 mcg (400–600 IU) for infants, children, and adolescents, depending on age.

Intake recommendations for vitamin D and other nutrients are provided in the Dietary Reference Intakes (DRIs) developed by expert committees of NASEM [1]. DRI is the general term for a set of reference values used for planning and assessing nutrient intakes of healthy people. These values include the following:

    Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA): Average daily level of intake sufficient to meet the nutrient requirements of nearly all (97%–98%) healthy individuals; often used to plan nutritionally adequate diets for individuals
    Adequate Intake (AI): Intake at this level is assumed to ensure nutritional adequacy; established when evidence is insufficient to develop an RDA
    Estimated Average Requirement (EAR): Average daily level of intake estimated to meet the requirements of 50% of healthy individuals; usually used to assess the nutrient intakes of groups of people and to plan nutritionally adequate diets for them; can also be used to assess the nutrient intakes of individuals
    Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL): Maximum daily intake unlikely to cause adverse health effects

The FNB established RDAs for vitamin D to indicate daily intakes sufficient to maintain bone health and normal calcium metabolism in healthy people. RDAs for vitamin D are listed in both micrograms (mcg) and International Units (IU); 1 mcg vitamin D is equal to 40 IU (Table 2). Even though sunlight is a major source of vitamin D for some people, the FNB based the vitamin D RDAs on the assumption that people receive minimal sun exposure [1]. For infants from birth to 12 months, the FNB developed AIs based on the amount of vitamin D that maintains serum 25(OH)D levels above 20 ng/mL (50 nmol/L) and supports bone development.
Table 2: Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDAs) for Vitamin D in Micrograms (mcg) and International Units (IU) [1] Age 	Male 	Female 	Pregnancy 	Lactation
0–6 months* 	10 mcg
(400 IU)* 	10 mcg
(400 IU)* 		
7–12 months* 	10 mcg
(400 IU)* 	10 mcg
(400 IU)* 		
1–3 years 	15 mcg
(600 IU) 	15 mcg
(600 IU) 		
4–8 years 	15 mcg
(600 IU) 	15 mcg
(600 IU) 		
9–13 years 	15 mcg
(600 IU) 	15 mcg
(600 IU) 		
14–18 years 	15 mcg
(600 IU) 	15 mcg
(600 IU) 	15 mcg
(600 IU) 	15 mcg
(600 IU)
19–50 years 	15 mcg
(600 IU) 	15 mcg
(600 IU) 	15 mcg
(600 IU) 	15 mcg
(600 IU)
51–70 years 	15 mcg
(600 IU) 	15 mcg
(600 IU) 		
>70 years 	20 mcg
(800 IU) 	20 mcg
(800 IU) 		
*Adequate Intake (AI)

Many other countries around the world and some professional societies have somewhat different guidelines for vitamin D intakes [15]. These differences are a result of an incomplete understanding of the biology and clinical implications of vitamin D, different purposes for the guidelines (e.g., for public health in a healthy population or for clinical practice), and/or the use in some guidelines of observational studies in addition to randomized clinical trials to establish recommendations [9,15]. For example, the United Kingdom Scientific Advisory Committee on Nutrition recommends intakes of 10 mcg (400 IU)/day for individuals age 4 years and older [16]. The Endocrine Society recommends routine vitamin D supplementation for children and teens age 1 to 18 years, pregnant women, adults with pre-diabetes, and adults age 75 years and older, but not for healthy adults age 19 to 74 [11,12]. The Endocrine Society does not recommend specific doses but notes that all individuals should adhere to the RDA.
Sources of Vitamin D
Food

Vitamin D is found naturally in a few foods, such as the flesh of fatty fish, fish liver oils, beef liver, egg yolks, and cheese. In American diets, fortified foods (e.g., milk, breakfast cereals) provide most of the vitamin D.

Few foods naturally contain vitamin D. The flesh of fatty fish (such as trout, salmon, tuna, and mackerel) and fish liver oils are among the best sources [17,1]. An animal’s diet affects the amount of vitamin D in its tissues. Beef liver, egg yolks, and cheese have small amounts of vitamin D, primarily in the form of vitamin D3 and its metabolite 25(OH)D3. Mushrooms provide variable amounts of vitamin D2 [17]. Some mushrooms available on the market have been treated with UV light to increase their levels of vitamin D2. In addition, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved UV-treated mushroom powder as a food additive for use as a source of vitamin D2 in food products [18]. Very limited evidence suggests no substantial differences in the bioavailability of vitamin D from various foods [19].

Animal-based foods typically provide some vitamin D in the form of 25(OH)D in addition to vitamin D3. The impact of this form on vitamin D status is an emerging area of research. Studies show that 25(OH)D appears to be approximately five times more potent than the parent vitamin for raising serum 25(OH)D concentrations [17,20,21]. One study found that when the 25(OH)D content of beef, pork, chicken, turkey, and eggs is taken into account, the total amount of vitamin D in the food is 2 to 18 times higher than the amount in the parent vitamin alone, depending on the food [20].

Fortified foods provide most of the vitamin D in American diets [1,22]. For example, almost all of the U.S. milk supply is voluntarily fortified with about 3 mcg/cup (120 IU), usually in the form of vitamin D3 [23]. In Canada, milk must be fortified with 0.88 to 1.0 mcg/100 mL (35–40 IU), and the required amount for margarine is at least 13.25 mcg/100 g (530 IU). Other dairy products made from milk, such as cheese and ice cream, are not usually fortified in the United States or Canada. Plant milk alternatives (such as beverages made from soy, almond, or oats) are often fortified with similar amounts of vitamin D to those in fortified cow's milk (about 3 mcg [120 IU]/cup); the Nutrition Facts label lists the actual amount [24]. Ready-to-eat breakfast cereals often contain added vitamin D, as do some brands of orange juice, yogurt, margarine, and other food products.

The United States mandates the fortification of infant formula with 1 to 2.5 mcg/100 kcal (40–100 IU) vitamin D; 1 to 2 mcg/100 kcal (40–80 IU) is the required amount in Canada [1].

A variety of foods and their vitamin D levels per serving are listed in Table 3.
Table 3: Vitamin D Content of Selected Foods [25] Food 	Micrograms
(mcg) per
serving 	International
Units (IU)
per serving 	Percent DV*
Cod liver oil, 1 tablespoon 	34.0 	1,360 	170
Trout (rainbow), farmed, cooked, 3 ounces 	16.2 	645 	81
Salmon (sockeye), cooked, 3 ounces 	14.2 	570 	71
Mushrooms, white, raw, sliced, exposed to UV light, ½ cup 	9.2 	366 	46
Milk, 2% milkfat, vitamin D fortified, 1 cup 	2.9 	120 	15
Soy, almond, and oat milks, vitamin D fortified, various brands, 1 cup 	2.5–3.6 	100–144 	13–18
Ready-to-eat cereal, fortified with 10% of the DV for vitamin D, 1 serving 	2.0 	80 	10
Sardines (Atlantic), canned in oil, drained, 2 sardines 	1.2 	46 	6
Egg, 1 large, scrambled** 	1.1 	44 	6
Liver, beef, braised, 3 ounces 	1.0 	42 	5
Tuna fish (light), canned in water, drained, 3 ounces 	1.0 	40 	5
Cheese, cheddar, 1.5 ounce 	0.4 	17 	2
Mushrooms, portabella, raw, diced, ½ cup 	0.1 	4 	1
Chicken breast, roasted, 3 ounces 	0.1 	4 	1
Beef, ground, 90% lean, broiled, 3 ounces 	0 	1.7 	0
Broccoli, raw, chopped, ½ cup 	0 	0 	0
Carrots, raw, chopped, ½ cup 	0 	0 	0
Almonds, dry roasted, 1 ounce 	0 	0 	0
Apple, large 	0 	0 	0
Banana, large 	0 	0 	0
Rice, brown, long-grain, cooked, 1 cup 	0 	0 	0
Whole wheat bread, 1 slice 	0 	0 	0
Lentils, boiled, ½ cup 	0 	0 	0
Sunflower seeds, roasted, ½ cup 	0 	0 	0
Edamame, shelled, cooked, ½ cup 	0 	0 	0
*DV = Daily Value. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) developed DVs to help consumers compare the nutrient contents of foods and dietary supplements within the context of a total diet. The DV for vitamin D is 20 mcg (800 IU) for adults and children age 4 years and older [26]. FDA requires food labels to list vitamin D content in mcg per serving. In addition, labels may optionally list the amount in IUs in parentheses. Foods providing 20% or more of the DV are considered to be high sources of a nutrient, but foods providing lower percentages of the DV also contribute to a healthful diet.
** Vitamin D is in the yolk.

The U.S. Department of Agriculture’s (USDA’s) FoodData Central lists the nutrient content of many foods and provides a comprehensive list of foods containing vitamin D arranged by nutrient content and by food name. However, FoodData Central does not include the amounts of 25(OH)D in foods.
Sun exposure

People can get some of their daily vitamin D through exposure to sunlight, although the season, time of day, length of day, cloud cover, melanin content of the skin, and other factors can affect ultraviolet radiation exposure and vitamin D synthesis.

Most people in the world meet at least some of their vitamin D needs through exposure to sunlight [1]. Type B UV (UVB) radiation with a wavelength of approximately 290 to 320 nanometers penetrates uncovered skin and converts cutaneous 7-dehydrocholesterol to previtamin D3, which in turn becomes vitamin D3. Season, time of day, length of day, cloud cover, smog, skin melanin content, and sunscreen are among the factors that affect UV radiation exposure and vitamin D synthesis. Older people and people with dark skin are less able to produce vitamin D from sunlight [1]. UVB radiation does not penetrate glass, so exposure to sunshine indoors through a window does not produce vitamin D [27].

The factors that affect UV radiation exposure, individual responsiveness, and uncertainties about the amount of sun exposure needed to maintain adequate vitamin D levels make it difficult to provide guidelines on how much sun exposure is required for sufficient vitamin D synthesis [15,28]. Some expert bodies and vitamin D researchers suggest, for example, that approximately 5 to 30 minutes of sun exposure, particularly between 10 a.m. and 4 p.m., either daily or at least twice a week to the face, arms, hands, and legs without sunscreen usually leads to sufficient vitamin D synthesis [13,15,28]. Moderate use of commercial tanning beds that emit 2% to 6% UVB radiation is also effective [13,29].

However, despite the importance of the sun for vitamin D synthesis, limiting skin exposure to sunlight and UV radiation from tanning beds is prudent [28]. UV radiation is a carcinogen, and UV exposure is the most preventable cause of skin cancer. Federal agencies and national organizations advise taking photoprotective measures to reduce the risk of skin cancer, including using sunscreen with a sun protection factor (SPF) of 15 or higher, whenever people are exposed to the sun [28,30]. Sunscreens with an SPF of 8 or more appear to block vitamin D-producing UV rays. In practice, however, people usually do not apply sufficient amounts of sunscreen, cover all sun-exposed skin, or reapply sunscreen regularly. Their skin probably synthesizes some vitamin D, even with typically applied sunscreen amounts [1,28].
Dietary supplements

Vitamin D is present in dietary supplements as either vitamin D2 or vitamin D3. Both can raise the serum level of 25(OH)D. However, research shows that vitamin D3 increases serum 25(OH)D levels to a greater extent than vitamin D2 and can maintain those higher levels for longer periods of time.

Dietary supplements can contain vitamins D2 or D3. Vitamin D2 is manufactured using UV irradiation of ergosterol in yeast, and vitamin D3 is typically produced with irradiation of 7-dehydrocholesterol from lanolin obtained from the wool of sheep [13,31]. An animal-free version of vitamin D3 sourced from lichen is also available [32]. People who avoid all animal-sourced products can contact dietary supplement manufacturers to ask about their sourcing and processing techniques.

Both vitamins D2 and D3 raise serum 25(OH)D levels, and they seem to have equivalent ability to cure rickets [4]. In addition, most steps in the metabolism and actions of vitamins D2 and D3 are identical. However, most evidence indicates that vitamin D3 increases serum 25(OH)D levels to a greater extent and maintains these higher levels longer than vitamin D2, even though both forms are well absorbed in the gut [33-36].

Some studies have used dietary supplements containing the 25(OH)D3 form of vitamin D. Per equivalent microgram dose, 25(OH)D3 is three to five times as potent as vitamin D3 [37,38]. However, no 25(OH)D3 dietary supplements appear to be available to consumers on the U.S. market at this time [32].
Vitamin D Intakes and Status

According to data from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, most people in the United States consume less than the recommended amounts of vitamin D. However, evidence suggests that the majority of people have sufficient serum concentrations of vitamin D based on the thresholds set by the Food and Nutrition Board. Sun exposure is one of the reasons why serum levels of 25(OH)D are generally higher than would be predicted on the basis of vitamin D dietary intakes alone.

Most people in the United States consume less than recommended amounts of vitamin D. An analysis of data from the 2015–2016 National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) found that average daily vitamin D intakes from foods and beverages were 5.1 mcg (204 IU) in men, 4.2 mcg (168 IU) in women, and 4.9 mcg (196 IU) in children age 2 to 19 years [39]. In fact, 2013–2016 NHANES data showed that 92% of men, more than 97% of women, and 94% of people age 1 year and older ingested less than the EAR of 10 mcg (400 IU) of vitamin D from food and beverages [40].

The analysis of 2015–2016 data also showed that 28% of all individuals age 2 years and older in the United States took a dietary supplement containing vitamin D [39]. In addition, 26% of participants age 2 to 5 years and 14% of those age 6 to 11 years took supplements; rates increased with age from 10% of those age 12 to 19 years to 49% of men and 59% of women age 60 and older. Total vitamin D intakes were three times higher with supplement use than with diet alone; the mean intake from foods and beverages alone for individuals age 2 and older was 4.8 mcg (192 IU) but increased to 19.9 mcg (796 IU) when dietary supplements were included.

Some people take very high doses of vitamin D supplements. In 2013–2014, an estimated 3.2% of the U.S. adult population took supplements containing 100 mcg (4,000 IU) or more vitamin D [41].

One might expect a large proportion of the U.S. population to have vitamin D inadequacy on the basis of vitamin D intakes from foods, beverages, and even dietary supplements. However, comparing vitamin D intakes to serum 25(OH)D levels is problematic. One reason is that sun exposure affects vitamin D status, so serum 25(OH)D levels are usually higher than would be predicted on the basis of vitamin D dietary intakes alone [1]. Another reason is that animal foods contain some 25(OH)D. This form of vitamin D is not included in intake surveys and is considerably more potent than vitamins D2 or D3 at raising serum 25(OH)D levels [42].

An analysis of NHANES 2011–2014 data on serum 25(OH)D levels found that most people in the United States age 1 year and older had sufficient vitamin D intakes according to the FNB thresholds [43]. However, 18% were at risk of inadequacy (levels of 30–49 nmol/L [12–19.6 ng/mL]), and 5% were at risk of deficiency (levels below 30 nmol/L [12 ng/mL]). Four percent had levels higher than 125 nmol/L (50 ng/mL). Proportions at risk of deficiency were lowest among children age 1 to 5 years (0.5%), peaked at 7.6% in adults age 20 to 39 years, and fell to 2.9% among adults age 60 years and older; patterns were similar for risks of inadequacy. Rates of deficiency varied by race and ethnicity: 17.5% of non-Hispanic Blacks were at risk of vitamin D deficiency, as were 7.6% of non-Hispanic Asians, 5.9% of Hispanics, and 2.1% of non-Hispanic White people. Again, the pattern was similar for the risk of inadequacy. Vitamin D status in the United States remained stable in the decade between 2003–2004 and 2013–2014.
Vitamin D Deficiency

Vitamin D deficiency is more common among people who are lactose intolerant, have a milk allergy, or follow an ovo-vegetarian or vegan diet. Deficiency may also occur in people who have limited exposure to sunlight, those whose kidneys cannot convert 25(OH)D to its active form, or those who cannot absorb vitamin D efficiently in the digestive tract. Vitamin D deficiency can manifest as rickets in children and as osteomalacia in adolescents and adults.

People can develop vitamin D deficiency when usual intakes are lower over time than recommended levels, exposure to sunlight is limited, the kidneys cannot convert 25(OH)D to its active form, or absorption of vitamin D from the digestive tract is inadequate. Diets low in vitamin D are more common in people who have milk allergy or lactose intolerance and those who consume an ovo-vegetarian or vegan diet [1].

In children, vitamin D deficiency is manifested as rickets, a disease characterized by a failure of bone tissue to become properly mineralized, resulting in soft bones and skeletal deformities [44]. In addition to bone deformities and pain, severe rickets can cause failure to thrive, developmental delay, hypocalcemic seizures, tetanic spasms, cardiomyopathy, and dental abnormalities [45,46].

Prolonged exclusive breastfeeding without vitamin D supplementation can cause rickets in infants, and, in the United States, rickets is most common among breastfed Black infants and children [47]. In one Minnesota county, the incidence rate of rickets in children younger than 3 years in the decade beginning in 2000 was 24.1 per 100,000 [48]. Rickets occurred mainly in Black children who were breastfed longer, were born with low birthweight, weighed less, and were shorter than other children. The incidence rate of rickets in the infants and children (younger than 7) seen by 2,325 pediatricians throughout Canada was 2.9 per 100,000 in 2002–2004, and almost all patients with rickets had been breastfed [49].

The fortification of milk (a good source of calcium) and other staples, such as breakfast cereals and margarine, with vitamin D beginning in the 1930s along with the use of cod liver oil made rickets rare in the United States [28,50]. However, the incidence of rickets is increasing globally, even in the United States and Europe, especially among immigrants from African, Middle-Eastern, and Asian countries [51]. Possible explanations for this increase include genetic differences in vitamin D metabolism, dietary preferences, and behaviors that lead to less sun exposure [45,46].

In adults and adolescents, vitamin D deficiency can lead to osteomalacia, in which existing bone is incompletely or defectively mineralized during the remodeling process, resulting in weak bones [46]. Signs and symptoms of osteomalacia are similar to those of rickets and include bone deformities and pain, hypocalcemic seizures, tetanic spasms, and dental abnormalities [45].

Screening for vitamin D status is becoming a more common part of the routine laboratory bloodwork ordered by primary-care physicians, irrespective of any indications for this practice [6,52-54]. No studies have examined whether such screening for vitamin D deficiency results in improved health outcomes [55]. The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) found insufficient evidence to assess the benefits and harms of screening for vitamin D deficiency in asymptomatic adults [6]. It added that no national professional organization recommends population screening for vitamin D deficiency.
Groups at Risk of Vitamin D Inadequacy

Certain groups of people are more likely than others to have inadequate vitamin D status. These include breastfed infants, older adults, people with limited sun exposure, people with dark skin, people with conditions that limit fat absorption, and people with obesity or those who have undergone gastric bypass surgery.

Obtaining sufficient vitamin D from natural (nonfortified) food sources alone is difficult. For many people, consuming vitamin D-fortified foods and exposing themselves to some sunlight are essential for maintaining a healthy vitamin D status. However, some groups might need dietary supplements to meet their vitamin D requirements. The following groups are among those most likely to have inadequate vitamin D status.
Breastfed infants

Consumption of human milk alone does not ordinarily enable infants to meet vitamin D requirements, because it provides less than 0.6 to 2.0 mcg/L (25 to 78 IU/L) [1,56,57]. The vitamin D content of human milk is related to the mother’s vitamin D status; studies suggest that the breastmilk of mothers who take daily supplements containing at least 50 mcg (2,000 IU) vitamin D3 have higher levels of the nutrient [57,58].

Although UVB exposure can produce vitamin D in infants, the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) advises parents to keep infants younger than 6 months out of direct sunlight, dress them in protective clothing and hats, and apply sunscreen on small areas of exposed skin when sun exposure is unavoidable [59]. The AAP recommends 10 mcg (400 IU)/day vitamin D supplements for exclusively and partially breastfed infants starting shortly after birth and lasting until they are weaned and consume at least 1,000 mL/day vitamin D-fortified formula or whole milk [57]. The AAP also recommends 10 mcg (400 IU)/day supplemental vitamin D for all infants who are not breastfed and ingest less than 1,000 mL/day vitamin D-fortified formula or milk. An analysis of NHANES 2009–2016 data found that only 20.5% of breastfed infants and 31.1% of infants who were not breastfed ingested these recommended amounts of supplements [60].
Older adults

Older adults are at increased risk of developing vitamin D insufficiency, partly because the skin's ability to synthesize vitamin D declines with age [1,61]. In addition, older adults are likely to spend more time than younger people indoors, and they might have inadequate dietary intakes of the vitamin [1].
People with limited sun exposure

Homebound individuals; people who wear long robes, dresses, or head coverings for religious reasons; and people with occupations that limit sun exposure are among the groups that are unlikely to obtain adequate amounts of vitamin D from sunlight [62]. The use of sunscreen also limits vitamin D synthesis from sunlight. However, because the extent and frequency of sunscreen use are unknown, the role that sunscreen may play in reducing vitamin D synthesis is unclear [1].
People with dark skin

Greater amounts of the pigment melanin in the epidermal layer of the skin result in darker skin and reduce the skin’s ability to produce vitamin D from sunlight [1]. Black Americans, for example, typically have lower serum 25(OH)D levels than White Americans. However, whether these lower levels in persons with dark skin have significant health consequences is not clear [14]. Those of African American ancestry, for example, have lower rates of bone fracture and osteoporosis than do Whites (see the section below on bone health and osteoporosis).
People with conditions that limit fat absorption

Because vitamin D is fat soluble, its absorption depends on the gut’s ability to absorb dietary fat [4]. Fat malabsorption is associated with medical conditions that include some forms of liver disease, cystic fibrosis, celiac disease, Crohn’s disease, and ulcerative colitis [1,63]. In addition to having an increased risk of vitamin D deficiency, people with these conditions might not eat certain foods, such as dairy products (many of which are fortified with vitamin D), or eat only small amounts of these foods. Individuals who have difficulty absorbing dietary fat might therefore require vitamin D supplementation [63].
People with obesity or who have undergone gastric bypass surgery

Individuals with a body mass index (BMI) of 30 or more have lower serum 25(OH)D levels than individuals without obesity. Obesity does not affect the skin’s capacity to synthesize vitamin D. However, greater amounts of subcutaneous fat sequester more of the vitamin [1]. People with obesity might need greater intakes of vitamin D to achieve 25(OH)D levels similar to those of people with normal weight [1,64,65].

Individuals with obesity who have undergone gastric bypass surgery can also become vitamin D deficient. In this procedure, part of the upper small intestine, where vitamin D is absorbed, is bypassed, and vitamin D that is mobilized into the bloodstream from fat stores might not raise 25(OH)D to adequate levels over time [66,67]. Various expert groups—including the American Association of Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery, The Obesity Society, and the British Obesity and Metabolic Surgery Society—have developed guidelines on vitamin D screening, monitoring, and replacement before and after bariatric surgery [66,68]
Vitamin D and Health

The FNB committee that established DRIs for vitamin D found that the evidence was inadequate or too contradictory to conclude that the vitamin had any effect on a long list of potential health outcomes (e.g., on resistance to chronic diseases or functional measures), except for measures related to bone health. Similarly, in a review of data from nearly 250 studies published between 2009 and 2013, the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality concluded that no relationship could be firmly established between vitamin D and health outcomes other than bone health [69]. However, because research has been conducted on vitamin D and numerous health outcomes, this section focuses on seven diseases, conditions, and interventions in which vitamin D might be involved: bone health and osteoporosis, cancer, cardiovascular disease (CVD), depression, multiple sclerosis (MS), type 2 diabetes, and weight loss.

Most of the studies described in this section measured serum 25(OH)D levels using various methods that were not standardized by comparing them to the best methods. Use of unstandardized 25(OH)D measures can raise questions about the accuracy of the results and about the validity of conclusions drawn from studies that use such measures and, especially, from meta-analyses that pool data from many studies that use different unstandardized measures [5,9,70]. More information about assay standardization is available from the Vitamin D Standardization Program webpage.
Bone health and osteoporosis

Osteoporosis is characterized by low bone mass and the deterioration of bone tissue, which increases bone fragility and the risk of fractures. Clinical trials have shown that vitamin D and calcium supplements may increase bone mineral density in some postmenopausal women and older men, but it is not clear whether they reduce falls and fracture rates. In addition, the results of studies that have evaluated the effects of supplemental vitamin D on muscle strength and the rate of decline in muscle function have been inconsistent.

Bone is constantly being remodeled. However, as people age—and particularly in women during menopause—bone breakdown rates overtake rates of bone building. Over time, bone density can decline, and osteoporosis can eventually develop [71].

More than 53 million adults in the United States have or are at risk of developing osteoporosis, which is characterized by low bone mass and structural deterioration of bone tissue that increases bone fragility and the risk of bone fractures [72]. About 2.3 million osteoporotic fractures occurred in the United States in 2015 [73]. Osteoporosis is, in part, a long-term effect of calcium and/or vitamin D insufficiency, in contrast to rickets and osteomalacia, which result from vitamin D deficiency. Osteoporosis is most often associated with inadequate calcium intakes, but insufficient vitamin D intakes contribute to osteoporosis by reducing calcium absorption [1].

Bone health also depends on support from the surrounding muscles to assist with balance and postural sway and thereby reduce the risk of falling. Vitamin D is also needed for the normal development and growth of muscle fibers. In addition, inadequate vitamin D levels can adversely affect muscle strength and lead to muscle weakness and pain (myopathy) [1].

Most trials of the effects of vitamin D supplements on bone health also included calcium supplements, so isolating the effects of each nutrient is difficult. In addition, studies provided different amounts of nutrients and used different dosing schedules.
Clinical trial evidence on older adults

Among postmenopausal women and older men, many clinical trials have shown that supplements of both vitamin D and calcium result in small increases in bone mineral density throughout the skeleton [1,74]. They also help reduce fracture rates in institutionalized older people. However, the evidence on the impact of vitamin D and calcium supplements on fractures in community-dwelling individuals is inconsistent.

The USPSTF evaluated 11 randomized clinical trials of vitamin D and/or calcium supplementation in a total of 51,419 healthy, community-dwelling adults age 50 years and older who did not have osteoporosis, vitamin D deficiency, or prior fractures [75,76]. It concluded that the current evidence was insufficient to evaluate the benefits and harms of supplementation to prevent fractures. In addition, the USPSTF recommended against supplementation with 10 mcg (400 IU) or less of vitamin D and 1,000 mg or less of calcium to prevent fractures in this population, but it could not determine the balance of benefits and harms from higher doses.

The USPSTF also reviewed the seven published studies on the effects of vitamin D supplementation (two of them also included calcium supplementation) on the risk of falls in community-dwelling adults age 65 years or older who did not have osteoporosis or vitamin D deficiency. It concluded with moderate certainty that vitamin D supplementation does not reduce the numbers of falls or injuries, such as fractures, resulting from falls [77,78]. Another recent systematic review also found that vitamin D and calcium supplements had no beneficial effects on fractures, falls, or bone mineral density [79,80]. In contrast, a meta-analysis of six trials in 49,282 older adults found that daily vitamin D (10 or 20 mcg [400 IU or 800 IU]/day) and calcium (800 or 1,200 mg/day) supplementation for a mean of 5.9 years reduced the risk of any fracture by 6% and of hip fracture by 16% [81].

One systematic review and meta-analysis of 11 randomized, controlled trials published through 2018 of vitamin D supplementation alone (10–20 mcg [400–800 IU]/day or more at least every week or as rarely as once a year) for 9 months to 5 years found that the supplements provided no protection from fractures in 34,243 older adults [81].

More recently, a 2022 ancillary study of the Vitamin D and Omega-3 Trial (VITAL; described in the Cancer section below) investigated whether supplemental vitamin D3 (50 mcg [2,000 IU]/day) would lower the risk of fractures in 25,871 generally healthy men age 50 years and older and women age 55 years and older over a median follow-up of 5.3 years [82]. The mean age of all participants was 67.1 years; 50.6% were women and 20.2% were Black. Most participants were vitamin D sufficient; at baseline, only 2.4% had serum 25(OH)D levels less than 30 nmol/L (12 ng/mL), and 12.9% less than 50 nmol/L (20 ng/mL). Vitamin D supplementation did not lower the risk of total fractures, hip fractures, or nonvertebral fractures as compared with placebo. No substantial between-group differences in fracture incidence were found by race, ethnic group, BMI, age, baseline 25(OH)D levels, or whether participants took supplemental calcium, were at high fracture risk, or had a history of fragility fractures.
Vitamin D supplements for bone health in minority populations

Bone mineral density, bone mass, and fracture risk are correlated with serum 25(OH)D levels in White Americans and Mexican Americans, but not in Black Americans [14,83]. Factors such as adiposity, skin pigmentation, vitamin D binding protein polymorphisms, and genetics contribute to differences in 25(OH)D levels between Black and White Americans.

One clinical trial randomized 260 Black women age 60 years and older (mean age 68.2 years) to receive 60 to 120 mcg (2,400 to 4,800 IU) per day vitamin D3 supplementation to maintain serum 25(OH)D levels above 75 nmol/L (30 ng/mL) for 3 years [84]. The results showed no association between 25(OH)D levels or vitamin D dose and the risk of falling in the 184 participants who completed the study. In fact, Black Americans might have a greater risk than White Americans of falls and fractures with daily vitamin D intakes of 50 mcg (2,000 IU) or more [14]. Furthermore, the bone health of older Black American women does not appear to benefit from raising serum 25(OH)D levels beyond 50 nmol/L (20 ng/mL) [84].
Vitamin D supplements and muscle function

Studies examining the effects of supplemental vitamin D on muscle strength and on rate of decline in muscle function have had inconsistent results [55]. One recent clinical trial, for example, randomized 78 frail and near-frail adults age 65 years and older to receive 20 mcg (800 IU) vitamin D3, 10 mcg 25(OH)D, or placebo daily for 6 months. The groups showed no significant differences in measures of muscle strength or performance [85]. Another study randomized 100 community-dwelling men and women age 60 years and older (most were White) with serum 25(OH)D levels of 50 nmol/L (20 ng/ml) or less to 800 IU vitamin D3 or placebo for 1 year [86]. Participants in the treatment group whose serum 25(OH)D level was less than 70 nmol/L (28 ng/ml) after 4 months received an additional 800 IU/day vitamin D3. Despite increasing serum 25(OH)D levels to an average of more than 80 nmol/L (32 ng/ml), vitamin D supplementation did not affect lower-extremity power, strength, or lean mass.
Conclusions about vitamin D supplements and bone health

All adults should consume recommended amounts of vitamin D and calcium from foods and supplements if needed. Older women and men should consult their health care providers about their needs for both nutrients as part of an overall plan to maintain bone health and to prevent or treat osteoporosis.
Cancer

Some evidence suggests that vitamin D might inhibit carcinogenesis and slow tumor progression. However, most research has found no relationship between serum 25(OH)D levels and risk of cancer. The results of clinical trials have generally failed to show that vitamin D supplementation with or without calcium supplementation reduces the incidence of cancer. Adequate or higher 25(OH)D levels might reduce cancer mortality rates, but more research is needed to determine the effects of vitamin D supplementation in people with cancer.

Laboratory and animal studies suggest that vitamin D might inhibit carcinogenesis and slow tumor progression by, for example, promoting cell differentiation and inhibiting metastasis. Vitamin D might also have anti-inflammatory, immunomodulatory, proapoptotic, and antiangiogenic effects [1,87]. Observational studies and clinical trials provide mixed evidence on whether vitamin D intakes or serum levels affect cancer incidence, progression, or mortality risk.
Total cancer incidence and mortality

Some observational studies show associations between low serum levels of 25(OH)D and increased risks of cancer incidence and death. In a meta-analysis of 16 prospective cohort studies in a total of 137,567 participants who had 8,345 diagnoses of cancer, 5,755 participants died from cancer [88]. A 50 nmol/L (20 ng/mL) increase in 25(OH)D levels was associated with an 11% reduction in total cancer incidence rates and, in women but not men, a 24% reduction in cancer mortality rates. A meta-analysis of prospective studies that evaluated the association between serum 25(OH)D levels and cancer incidence (8 studies) or cancer mortality (16 studies) found that cancer risk decreased by 7% and cancer mortality rates decreased by 2% with each 20 nmol/L (8 ng/mL) increase in serum 25(OH)D levels [89]. Importantly, not all observational studies found higher vitamin D status to be beneficial, and the studies varied considerably in study populations, baseline comorbidities, and measurement of vitamin D levels.

Clinical trial evidence provides some support for the observational findings. For example, three meta-analyses of clinical trial evidence found that vitamin D supplementation does not affect cancer incidence but does significantly reduce total cancer mortality rates by 12% to 13% [90-92]. In the most recent meta-analysis, 10 randomized clinical trials (including the VITAL trial described below) that included 6,537 cancer cases provided 10 to 50 mcg (400–2,000 IU) vitamin D3 daily (six trials) or 500 mcg (20,000 IU)/week to 12,500 mcg (500,000 IU)/year boluses of vitamin D3 (four trials) [91]. The study reports included 3 to 10 years of follow-up data. The vitamin D supplements were associated with serum 25(OH)D levels of 54 to 135 nmol/L (21.6–54 ng/mL). Vitamin D supplementation reduced cancer mortality rates by 13%, and most of the benefit occurred with daily supplementation.

The VITAL clinical trial that investigated the effects of vitamin D supplementation on the primary prevention of cancer in the general population gave 50 mcg (2,000 IU)/day vitamin D3 supplements with or without 1,000 mg/day marine omega-3 fatty acids or a placebo for a median of 5.3 years [93]. The study included 25,871 men age 50 years and older and women age 55 years and older who had no history of cancer, and most had adequate serum 25(OH)D levels at baseline. Rates of breast, prostate, and colorectal cancer did not differ significantly between the vitamin D and placebo groups. However, normal-weight participants had greater reductions in cancer incidence and mortality rates than those with overweight or obesity.

The Women's Health Initiative (WHI) clinical trial randomized 36,282 postmenopausal women to receive 10 mcg (400 IU) vitamin D3 plus 1,000 mg calcium daily or a placebo for a mean of 7 years [94]. Results showed no effect of supplemental vitamin D and calcium on cancer incidence or mortality during the 7-year trial. Similarly, the supplements did not affect cancer incidence over a long-term median follow-up of 22.3 years, but they did reduce cancer mortality by 7% over this period of time [95].

A few studies have examined the effect of vitamin D supplementation on specific cancers. Below are brief descriptions of studies of vitamin D and its association with, or effect on, breast, colorectal, lung, pancreatic, and prostate cancers.
Breast cancer

Some observational studies support an inverse association between 25(OH)D levels and breast cancer risk and mortality, but others do not [96-99]. In the WHI clinical trial described above, vitamin D3 and calcium supplements did not reduce breast cancer incidence, and 25(OH)D levels at the start of the study were not associated with breast cancer risk [100].

In a subsequent investigation for 4.9 years after the study's end, women who had taken the vitamin D and calcium supplements (many of whom continued to take them) had an 18% lower risk of in situ (noninvasive) breast cancer [101]. However, women with vitamin D intakes higher than 15 mcg (600 IU)/day at the start of the trial and who received the supplements experienced a 28% increased risk of invasive (but not in situ) breast cancer.
Colorectal cancer

A large case-control study included 5,706 individuals who developed colorectal cancer and whose 25(OH)D levels were assessed a median of 5.5 years from blood draw to cancer diagnosis and 7,105 matched controls [102]. The results showed an association between 25(OH)D levels lower than 30 nmol/L (12 ng/mL) and a 31% higher colorectal cancer risk. Levels of 75 to less than 87.5 nmol/L (30 to less than 35 ng/mL) and 87.5 to less than 100 nmol/L (35 to less than 40 ng/mL) were associated with a 19% and 27% lower risk, respectively. The association was substantially stronger in women.

In the WHI clinical trial described above, vitamin D3 and calcium supplements had no effect on rates of colorectal cancer [103]. In a subsequent investigation for 4.9 years after the study's end, women who had taken the vitamin D and calcium supplements (many of whom continued to take them) still had the same colorectal cancer risk as those who received placebo [101].

Another study included 2,259 healthy individuals age 45 to 75 years who had had one or more serrated polyps (precursor lesions to colorectal cancer) that had been removed [104]. These participants were randomized to take 25 mcg (1,000 IU) vitamin D3, 1,200 mg calcium, both supplements, or a placebo daily for 3 to 5 years, followed by an additional 3 to 5 years of observation after participants stopped the treatment. Vitamin D alone did not significantly affect the development of new serrated polyps, but the combination of vitamin D with calcium increased the risk almost fourfold. The VITAL trial found no association between vitamin D supplementation and the risk of colorectal adenomas or serrated polyps [105].
Lung cancer

A study of cohorts that included 5,313 participants who developed lung cancer and 5,313 matched controls found no association between serum 25(OH)D levels and risk of subsequent lung cancer, even when the investigators analyzed the data by sex, age, race and ethnicity, and smoking status [106].
Pancreatic cancer

One study comparing 738 men who developed pancreatic cancer to 738 matched controls found no relationship between serum 25(OH)D levels and risk of pancreatic cancer [107]. Another study that compared 200 male smokers in Finland with pancreatic cancer to 400 matched controls found that participants in the highest quintile of 25(OH)D levels (more than 65.5 nmol/L [26.2 ng/mL]) had a threefold greater risk of developing pancreatic cancer over 16.7 years than those in the lowest quintile (less than 32 nmol/L [12.8 ng/mL]) [108]. An investigation that pooled data from 10 studies of cancer in 12,205 men and women found that concentrations of 25(OH)D greater than 75 nmol/L (30 ng/mL) but less than 100 nmol/L (40 ng/mL) did not reduce the risk of pancreatic cancer. However, the results did show an increased risk of pancreatic cancer with 25(OH)D levels of 100 nmol/L (40 ng/mL) or above [109].
Prostate cancer

Research to date provides mixed evidence on whether levels of 25(OH)D are associated with the development of prostate cancer. Several studies published in 2014 suggested that high levels of 25(OH)D might increase the risk of prostate cancer. For example, a meta-analysis of 21 studies that included 11,941 men with prostate cancer and 13,870 controls found a 17% higher risk of prostate cancer for participants with higher levels of 25(OH)D [110]. What constituted a higher level varied by study but was typically at least 75 nmol/L (30 ng/mL). In a cohort of 4,733 men, of which 1,731 had prostate cancer, those with 25(OH)D levels of 45 to 70 nmol/L (18–28 ng/mL) had a significantly lower risk of the disease than men with either lower or higher values [111]. This U-shaped association was most pronounced for men with the most aggressive forms of prostate cancer. A case-control analysis of 1,695 cases of prostate cancer and 1,682 controls found no associations between 25(OH)D levels and prostate cancer risk [112]. However, higher serum 25(OH)D levels (at a cut point of 75 nmol/L [30 ng/mL]) were linked to a modestly higher risk of slow-growth prostate cancer and a more substantial lower risk of aggressive disease.

Since 2014, however, several published studies and meta-analyses have found no relationship between 25(OH)D levels and prostate cancer risk [113,114]. For example, an analysis was conducted of 19 prospective studies that provided data on prediagnostic levels of 25(OH)D for 13,462 men who developed prostate cancer and 20,261 control participants [115]. Vitamin D deficiency or insufficiency did not increase the risk of prostate cancer, and higher 25(OH)D concentrations were not associated with a lower risk.

Several studies have examined whether levels of 25(OH)D in men with prostate cancer are associated with a lower risk of death from the disease or from any cause. One study included 1,119 men treated for prostate cancer whose plasma 25(OH)D levels were measured 4.9 to 8.6 years after their diagnosis. Among the 198 participants who died (41 deaths were due to prostate cancer), 25(OH)D levels were not associated with risk of death from prostate cancer or any cause [116]. However, a meta-analysis of seven cohort studies that included 7,808 men with prostate cancer found higher 25(OH)D levels to be significantly associated with lower mortality rates from prostate cancer or any other cause [117]. A dose-response analysis found that each 20 nmol/L [8 ng/mL] increase in 25(OH)D was associated with a 9% lower risk of both all-cause and prostate cancer-specific mortality.

For men with prostate cancer, whether vitamin D supplementation lengthens cancer-related survival is not clear. A meta-analysis of three randomized controlled trials in 1,273 men with prostate cancer found no significant differences in total mortality rates between those receiving vitamin D supplementation (from 10 mcg [400 IU]/day for 28 days to 45 mcg [1,800 IU] given in three doses total at 2-week intervals) and those receiving a placebo [118].
Conclusions about vitamin D and cancer

The USPSTF stated that, due to insufficient evidence, it was unable to assess the balance of benefits and harms of supplemental vitamin D to prevent cancer [119]. Taken together, studies to date do not indicate that vitamin D with or without calcium supplementation reduces the incidence of cancer, but adequate or higher 25(OH)D levels might reduce cancer mortality rates. Further research is needed to determine whether vitamin D inadequacy increases cancer risk, whether greater exposure to the nutrient can prevent cancer, and whether some individuals could have an increased risk of cancer because of their vitamin D status over time.
Cardiovascular disease

Vitamin D has been linked to heart health and the risk of cardiovascular disease and vitamin D deficiency is associated with vascular dysfunction, arterial stiffening, left ventricular hypertrophy, and hyperlipidemia. While data from observational studies support an association between higher serum levels of 25(OH)D and a lower risk of cardiovascular disease incidence and mortality, clinical trials have not confirmed these results; several trials have reported that vitamin D supplementation did not reduce the risk of cardiovascular disease, even among people with low 25(OH)D status.

Vitamin D helps regulate the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (and thereby blood pressure), vascular cell growth, and inflammatory and fibrotic pathways [120]. Vitamin D deficiency is associated with vascular dysfunction, arterial stiffening, left ventricular hypertrophy, and hyperlipidemia [121]. For these reasons, vitamin D has been linked to heart health and risk of CVD.

Observational studies support an association between higher serum 25(OH)D levels and a lower risk of CVD incidence and mortality. For example, a meta-analysis included 34 observational studies that followed 180,667 participants (mean age greater than 50 years) for 1.3 to more than 32 years. The results showed that baseline serum 25(OH)D levels were inversely associated with total number of CVD events (including myocardial infarction, ischemic heart disease, heart failure, and stroke) and mortality risk [122]. Overall, the risk of CVD events was 10% lower for each 25 nmol/L (10 ng/mL) increase in serum 25(OH)D.

Another large observational study that followed 247,574 adults from Denmark for 0 to 7 years found that levels of 25(OH)D that were low (about 12.5 nmol/L [5 ng/mL]) and high (about 125 nmol/L [50 ng/mL]) were associated with a greater risk of mortality from CVD, stroke, and acute myocardial infarction [123]. Other meta-analyses of prospective studies have found associations between lower vitamin D status measured by serum 25(OH)D levels or vitamin D intakes and an increased risk of ischemic stroke, ischemic heart disease, myocardial infarction, and early death [124,125].

In contrast to the observational studies, clinical trials have provided little support for the hypothesis that supplemental vitamin D reduces the risk of CVD or CVD mortality. For example, a 3-year trial in New Zealand randomized 5,110 adults (mean age 65.9 years) to a single dose of 5,000 mcg (200,000 IU) vitamin D3 followed by 2,500 mcg (100,000 IU) each month or a placebo for a median of 3.3 years [126]. Vitamin D supplementation had no effect on the incidence rate of myocardial infarction, angina, heart failure, arrhythmia, arteriosclerosis, stroke, venous thrombosis, or death from CVD. Similarly, the VITAL clinical trial described above found that vitamin D supplements did not significantly decrease rates of heart attacks, strokes, coronary revascularization, or deaths from cardiovascular causes [93]. Moreover, the effects did not vary by baseline serum 25(OH)D levels or whether participants took the trial’s omega-3 supplement in addition to vitamin D.

However, another clinical trial designed to investigate bone fracture risk found that 20 mcg (800 IU)/day vitamin D3 (with or without calcium) or a placebo in 5,292 adults age 70 years and older for a median of 6.2 years offered protection from cardiac failure, but not myocardial infarction or stroke [127]. In the WHI clinical trial described above, daily supplementation with 10 mcg (400 IU) vitamin D3 and 1,000 mg calcium did not affect cardiovascular disease risk during the 7-year trial [128] or during a long-term median follow-up of 22.3 years [95]. However, during this long-term follow-up period, women who received the supplements had a 6% higher risk of death from cardiovascular disease than those who received placebo [95]. 

High serum cholesterol levels and hypertension are two of the main risk factors for CVD. The data on supplemental vitamin D and cholesterol levels are mixed, as shown in one meta-analysis of 41 clinical trials in a total of 3,434 participants (mean age 55 years). The results of this analysis showed that 0.5 mcg (20 IU) to 214 mcg (8,570 IU)/day vitamin D supplementation (mean of 2,795 IU) for 6 weeks to 3 years reduced serum total cholesterol, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, and triglyceride levels, but not high-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels [129].

Studies of the effects of vitamin D supplements on hypertension have also had mixed findings. In one meta-analysis of 46 clinical trials that included 4,541 participants, vitamin D supplements (typically 40 mcg [1,600 IU]/day or less) for a minimum of 4 weeks had no significant effects on systolic or diastolic blood pressure [130]. In contrast, another meta-analysis of 30 clinical trials in 4,744 participants (mean age 54.5 years) that administered 5 mcg (200 IU) to 300 mcg (12,000 IU)/day vitamin D3 for a mean of 5.6 months showed that more than 20 mcg (800 IU)/day significantly reduced systolic and diastolic blood pressure in normal-weight participants who had hypertension [131]. However, more than 20 mcg (800 IU)/day vitamin D3, when taken with calcium supplements, significantly increased blood pressure in participants with overweight and obesity. Another meta-analysis of genetic studies in 146,581 participants (primarily adults) found that a low vitamin D status increased blood pressure and hypertension risk in people with genetic variants associated with low endogenous production of 25(OH)D [132].

Overall, clinical trials show that vitamin D supplementation does not reduce CVD risk, even for people with low 25(OH)D status (below 20 nmol/L [12 ng/mL]) at baseline [93,126].
Depression

Vitamin D may be involved in the pathophysiology of depression, and low levels of 25(OH)D have been associated with a higher risk of depression. However, vitamin D supplementation has not been shown to prevent depression or treat depressive symptoms in clinical trials.

Vitamin D receptors are present on neurons and glia in areas of the brain that are thought to be involved in the pathophysiology of depression [133].

A systematic review and meta-analysis of 14 observational studies that included a total of 31,424 adults (mean age ranging from 27.5 to 77 years) found an association between deficient or low levels of 25(OH)D and depression [133].

Clinical trials, however, do not support these findings. For example, a meta-analysis of nine trials with a total of 4,923 adult participants diagnosed with depression or depressive symptoms found no significant reduction in symptoms after supplementation with vitamin D [134]. The trials administered different amounts of vitamin D (ranging from 10 mcg [400 IU]/day to 1,000 mcg [40,000 IU]/week). They also had different study durations (5 days to 5 years), mean participant ages (range, 22 years to 75 years), and baseline 25(OH)D levels; furthermore, some but not all studies administered concurrent antidepressant medications.

Three trials conducted since that meta-analysis also found no effect of vitamin D supplementation on depressive symptoms. One trial included 206 adults (mean age 52 years) who were randomized to take a bolus dose of 2,500 mcg (100,000 IU) vitamin D3 followed by 500 mcg (20,000 IU)/week or a placebo for 4 months [135]. Most participants had minimal or mild depression, had a low mean baseline 25(OH) level of 33.8 nmol/L (13.5 ng/mL), and were not taking antidepressants. The second trial included 155 adults age 60 to 80 years who had clinically relevant depressive symptoms, no major depressive disorder, and serum 25(OH)D levels less than 50 to 70 nmol/L (20 to 28 ng/mL) depending on the season; in addition, they were not taking antidepressants [136,137]. Participants were randomized to take either 30 mcg (1,200 IU)/day vitamin D3 or a placebo for 1 year. In the VITAL trial described above, 16,657 men and women 50 years of age and older with no history of depression and 1,696 with an increased risk of recurrent depression (that had not been medically treated for the past 2 years) were randomized to take 50 mcg (2,000 IU)/day vitamin D3 (with or without fish oil) or a placebo for a median of 5.3 years [138]. The groups showed no significant differences in the incidence and recurrent rates of depression, clinically relevant depressive symptoms, or changes in mood scores.

Overall, clinical trials did not find that vitamin D supplements helped prevent or treat depressive symptoms or mild depression, especially in middle-age to older adults who were not taking prescription antidepressants. No studies have evaluated whether vitamin D supplements may benefit individuals under medical care for clinical depression who have low or deficient 25(OH)D levels and are taking antidepressant medication.
Multiple sclerosis

Epidemiological and genetic studies have found an association between multiple sclerosis and low 25(OH)D levels. Observational studies suggest that adequate vitamin D concentrations might reduce the risk of contracting multiple sclerosis, slow the disease’s progression, and decrease the risk of relapse. Clinical trial evidence is limited, so experts cannot draw conclusions about whether vitamin D can help prevent multiple sclerosis, but vitamin D supplementation does not appear to help mitigate the signs and symptoms of the disease or reduce relapse rates.

MS is an autoimmune disease of the central nervous system that damages the myelin sheath surrounding and protecting nerve cells in the brain and spinal cord. This damage hinders or blocks messages between the brain and body, leading to clinical features, such as vision loss, motor weakness, spasticity, ataxia, tremor, sensory loss, and cognitive impairment [139,140]. Some people with MS eventually lose the ability to write, speak, or walk.

The geographical distribution of MS around the world is unequal. Few people near the equator develop the disease, whereas the prevalence is higher further north and south. This uneven distribution has led to speculation that lower vitamin D levels in people who have less sunlight exposure might predispose them to the disease [140].

Many epidemiological and genetic studies have shown an association between MS and low 25(OH)D levels before and after the disease begins [140]. Observational studies suggest that adequate vitamin D levels might reduce the risk of contracting MS and, once MS is present, decrease the risk of relapse and slow the disease's progression [141]. One study, for example, tested 25(OH)D levels in 1,092 women in Finland an average of 9 years before their MS diagnosis and compared their outcomes with those of 2,123 similar women who did not develop MS [142]. More than half the women who developed MS had deficient or insufficient vitamin D levels. Women with 25(OH)D levels of less than 30 nmol/L (12 ng/mL) had a 43% higher MS risk than women with levels of 50 nmol/L (20 ng/mL) or higher. Among the women with two or more serum 25(OH)D samples taken before diagnosis (which reduced random measurement variation), a 50 nmol/L increase in 25(OH)D was associated with a 41% reduced risk of MS, and 25(OH)D levels less than 30 nmol/L were associated with an MS risk that was twice as high as levels of 50 nmol/L or higher.

Two earlier prospective studies of similar design—one in the United States with 444 non-Hispanic White individuals [143] and the other with 576 individuals in northern Sweden [144]—found that levels of 25(OH)D greater than 99.1 nmol/L (39.6 ng/mL) and at least 75 nmol/L (30 ng/mL), respectively, were associated with a 61% to 62% lower risk of MS.

No clinical trials have examined whether vitamin D supplementation can prevent the onset of MS, but several have investigated whether supplemental vitamin D can help manage the disease. A 2018 Cochrane Review analyzed 12 such trials that had a total of 933 participants with MS; the reviewers judged all of these trials to be of low quality [140]. Overall, vitamin D supplementation, when compared with placebo administration, had no effect on relevant clinical outcomes, such as recurrent relapse or worsened disability.

Experts have reached no firm consensus on whether vitamin D can help prevent MS given the lack of clinical trial evidence [145]. In addition, studies have not consistently shown that vitamin D supplementation tempers the signs and symptoms of active MS or reduces rates of relapse.
Type 2 diabetes

Observational studies have found an inverse association between vitamin D status and blood glucose levels. However, vitamin D supplementation does not appear to help maintain glucose homeostasis, reduce the risk of progression from prediabetes to type 2 diabetes, or help manage the disease, particularly in vitamin D-replete individuals.

Vitamin D plays a role in glucose metabolism. It stimulates insulin secretion via the vitamin D receptor on pancreatic beta cells and reduces peripheral insulin resistance through vitamin D receptors in the muscles and liver [146]. Vitamin D might be involved in the pathophysiology of type 2 diabetes through its effects on glucose metabolism and insulin signaling as well as its ability to reduce inflammation and improve pancreatic beta-cell function [147,148].

Observational studies have linked lower serum 25(OH)D levels to an increased risk of diabetes, but their results might have been confounded by the fact that many participants were overweight or had obesity and were therefore more predisposed to developing diabetes and having lower 25(OH)D levels [1]. A review of 71 observational studies in adults with and without type 2 diabetes from 16 countries found a significant inverse relationship between vitamin D status and blood sugar levels in participants who did and did not have diabetes [149].

In contrast to observational studies, clinical trials provide little support for the benefits of vitamin D supplementation for glucose homeostasis. One trial included 65 adult men and women (mean age 32 years) with overweight or obesity who were otherwise healthy, did not have diabetes, and had low serum vitamin D levels (at or below 50 nmol/L [20 ng/mL]) [150]. The investigators randomly assigned participants to receive either a bolus oral dose of 2,500 mcg (100,000 IU) vitamin D3 followed by 100 mcg (4,000 IU)/day or a placebo for 16 weeks. In the 54 participants who completed the study, vitamin D supplementation did not improve insulin sensitivity or insulin secretion in comparison with placebo.

One systematic review and meta-analysis evaluated 35 clinical trials that included 43,407 adults with normal glucose tolerance, prediabetes, or type 2 diabetes who received a median of 83 mcg (3,332 IU)/day vitamin D supplements or placebo for a median of 16 weeks [151]. Vitamin D had no significant effects on glucose homeostasis, insulin secretion or resistance, or hemoglobin A1c levels (a measure of average blood sugar levels over the previous 2–3 months), irrespective of the study population, vitamin D dose, or trial quality.

Several trials have investigated whether vitamin D supplementation can prevent the transition from prediabetes to diabetes in patients with adequate 25(OH)D levels, and all have had negative results. In a trial in Norway, 511 men and women age 25 to 80 years (mean age 62 years) with prediabetes received 500 mcg (20,000 IU) vitamin D3 or a placebo each week for 5 years [152]. The results showed no significant differences in rates of progression to type 2 diabetes; in serum glucose, insulin, or hemoglobin A1c levels; or in measures of insulin resistance. At baseline, participants had an adequate mean serum 25(OH)D level of 60 nmol/L (24 ng/mL).

The largest trial to date of vitamin D supplements for diabetes prevention randomized 2,423 men and women age 25 years and older (mean age 60 years) with prediabetes and overweight or obesity (mean BMI of 32.1) to 100 mcg (4,000 IU)/day vitamin D3 or placebo for a median of 2.5 years [148]. Most participants (78%) had adequate serum levels of vitamin D at baseline (at least 50 nmol/L [20 ng/mL]). Vitamin D did not significantly prevent the development of diabetes in comparison with placebo. However, a post hoc analysis showed a 62% lower incidence of diabetes among participants with low baseline serum 25(OH)D levels (less than 30 nmol/L [12 ng/mL]) who took the vitamin D supplement than among those who took the placebo [148,153].

Studies have also assessed the value of vitamin D supplementation for managing diabetes, and they have found that the vitamin offers limited benefits. One meta-analysis of 20 clinical trials compared the effects of 0.5 mcg (20 IU)/day to 1,250 mcg (50,000 IU)/week vitamin D supplementation for 2 to 6 months with those of placebo on glycemic control in 2,703 adults from around the world who had diabetes [146]. The vitamin D reduced insulin resistance to a small but significant degree, especially in people taking more than 50 mcg (2,000 IU)/day who were vitamin D deficient at baseline, had good glycemic control, did not have obesity, and were of Middle Eastern ethnicity. However, the supplementation had no significant effects on fasting blood glucose, hemoglobin A1c, or fasting insulin levels.

Clinical trials to date provide little evidence that vitamin D supplementation helps maintain glucose homeostasis, reduces the risk of progression from prediabetes to type 2 diabetes, or helps manage the disease, particularly in vitamin D-replete individuals.
Weight loss

Although there is some evidence that higher body weights are associated with lower vitamin D status, the available research does not support the use of vitamin D supplements to promote weight loss.

Observational studies indicate that higher body weights are associated with lower vitamin D status, and individuals with obesity frequently have marginal or deficient circulating 25(OH)D levels [154]. However, clinical trials do not support a cause-and-effect relationship between vitamin D and weight loss.

A systematic review and meta-analysis of 15 weight-loss intervention studies that used caloric restriction, exercise, or both, but not necessarily vitamin D supplementation or other treatments, found that people who lost weight had significantly greater increases in serum 25(OH)D levels than those who maintained their weight [155]. In another study, 10 mcg (400 IU)/day vitamin D and 1,000 mg/day calcium supplementation slightly, but significantly, reduced weight gain amounts in comparison with placebo in postmenopausal women, especially those with a baseline total calcium intake of less than 1,200 mg/day [156]. However, a meta-analysis of 12 vitamin D supplementation trials (including 5 in which body composition measurements were primary outcomes) found that vitamin D supplements without calorie restriction did not affect body weight or fat mass when the results were compared with those of placebo [157].

Overall, the available research suggests that consuming higher amounts of vitamin D or taking vitamin D supplements does not promote weight loss.
Health Risks from Excessive Vitamin D

Vitamin D toxicity can cause hypercalcemia, hypercalciuria, and high serum 25(OH)D concentrations; in extreme cases, it may lead to renal failure, calcification of soft tissues, cardiac arrhythmias, and death. Vitamin D toxicity is almost always a result of excessive intakes of vitamin D through supplements. Taking calcium supplements in combination with vitamin D supplements may increase the risk of certain adverse effects. The Tolerable Upper Intake Level for vitamin D ranges from 25 to 100 mcg (1,000–4,000 IU), depending on age.

Excess amounts of vitamin D are toxic. Because vitamin D increases calcium absorption in the gastrointestinal tract, vitamin D toxicity results in marked hypercalcemia (total calcium greater than 11.1 mg/dL, beyond the normal range of 8.4–10.2 mg/dL), hypercalciuria, and high serum 25(OH)D levels (typically >375 nmol/l [150 ng/mL]) [158]. Hypercalcemia, in turn, can lead to nausea, vomiting, muscle weakness, neuropsychiatric disturbances, pain, loss of appetite, dehydration, polyuria, excessive thirst, and kidney stones.

In extreme cases, vitamin D toxicity causes renal failure, calcification of soft tissues throughout the body (including in coronary vessels and heart valves), cardiac arrhythmias, and even death. Vitamin D toxicity has been caused by consumption of dietary supplements that contained excessive vitamin D amounts because of manufacturing errors, that were taken inappropriately or in excessive amounts, or that were incorrectly prescribed by physicians, [158-160].

Experts do not believe that excessive sun exposure results in vitamin D toxicity because thermal activation of previtamin D3 in the skin gives rise to various non-vitamin D forms that limit formation of vitamin D3. Some vitamin D3 is also converted to nonactive forms [1]. However, frequent use of tanning beds, which provide artificial UV radiation, can lead to 25(OH)D levels well above 375 to 500 nmol/L (150–200 ng/mL) [161-163].

The combination of high intakes of calcium (about 2,100 mg/day from food and supplements) with moderate amounts of vitamin D (about 19 mcg [765 IU]/day from food and supplements) increased the risk of kidney stones by 17% over 7 years among 36,282 postmenopausal women who were randomly assigned to take 1,000 mg/day calcium and 10 mcg (400 IU)/day vitamin D or a placebo [164]. However, other, shorter (from 24 weeks to 5 years) clinical trials of vitamin D supplementation alone or with calcium in adults found greater risks of hypercalcemia and hypercalciuria, but not of kidney stones [165,166].

The FNB established ULs for vitamin D in 2010 (Table 4) [1]. While acknowledging that signs and symptoms of toxicity are unlikely at daily intakes below 250 mcg (10,000 IU), the FNB noted that even vitamin D intakes lower than the ULs might have adverse health effects over time. The FNB recommended avoiding serum 25(OH)D levels above approximately 125 to 150 nmol/L (50–60 ng/mL), and it found that even lower serum levels (approximately 75–120 nmol/L [30–48 ng/mL]) are associated with increases in rates of all-cause mortality, risk of cancer at some sites (e.g., pancreas), risk of cardiovascular events, and number of falls and fractures among older adults.
Table 4: Tolerable Upper Intake Levels (ULs) for Vitamin D in Micrograms (mcg) and International Units (IU) [1] Age 	Male 	Female 	Pregnancy 	Lactation
0–6 months 	25 mcg
(1,000 IU) 	25 mcg
(1,000 IU) 		
7–12 months 	38 mcg
(1,500 IU) 	38 mcg
(1,500 IU) 		
1–3 years 	63 mcg
(2,500 IU) 	63 mcg
(2,500 IU) 		
4–8 years 	75 mcg
(3,000 IU) 	75 mcg
(3,000 IU) 		
9–13 years 	100 mcg
(4,000 IU) 	100 mcg
(4,000 IU) 		
14–18 years 	100 mcg
(4,000 IU) 	100 mcg
(4,000 IU) 	100 mcg
(4,000 IU) 	100 mcg
(4,000 IU)
19–50 years 	100 mcg
(4,000 IU) 	100 mcg
(4,000 IU) 	100 mcg
(4,000 IU) 	100 mcg
(4,000 IU)
51–70 years 	100 mcg
(4,000 IU) 	100 mcg
(4,000 IU) 		
>70 years 	100 mcg
(4,000 IU) 	100 mcg
(4,000 IU) 		
Interactions with Medications

Vitamin D supplements may interact with medications, and some medications may affect vitamin D levels. These medications include orlistat, statins, steroids, and thiazide diuretics.

Vitamin D supplements may interact with several types of medications. A few examples are provided below. Individuals taking these and other medications on a regular basis should discuss their vitamin D intakes and status with their health care providers.
Orlistat

The weight-loss drug orlistat (Xenical and alli), together with a reduced-fat diet, can reduce the absorption of vitamin D from food and supplements, leading to lower 25(OH)D levels [167-170].
Statins

Statin medications reduce cholesterol synthesis. Because endogenous vitamin D is derived from cholesterol, statins may also reduce vitamin D synthesis [170]. In addition, high intakes of vitamin D, especially from supplements, might reduce the potency of atorvastatin (Lipitor), lovastatin (Altoprev and Mevacor), and simvastatin (FloLipid and Zocor), because these statins and vitamin D appear to compete for the same metabolizing enzyme [170-173].
Steroids

Corticosteroid medications, such as prednisone (Deltasone, Rayos, and Sterapred), are often prescribed to reduce inflammation. These medications can reduce calcium absorption and impair vitamin D metabolism [174-176]. In the NHANES 2001–2006 survey, 25(OH)D deficiency (less than 25 nmol/L [10 ng/mL]) was more than twice as common among children and adults who reported oral steroid use (11%) than in nonusers (5%) [177].
Thiazide diuretics

Thiazide diuretics (e.g., Hygroton, Lozol, and Microzide) decrease urinary calcium excretion. The combination of these diuretics with vitamin D supplements (which increase intestinal calcium absorption) might lead to hypercalcemia, especially among older adults and individuals with compromised renal function or hyperparathyroidism [170,178,179].
Vitamin D and Healthful Diets

In general, a person’s nutritional needs should be met primarily through foods. Fortified foods and dietary supplements may be useful in cases where it is not possible to meet the needs for specific nutrients through food alone, especially during certain life stages. The Dietary Guidelines for Americans offers a general description of healthy dietary patterns.

The federal government's 2020–2025 Dietary Guidelines for Americans notes that "Because foods provide an array of nutrients and other components that have benefits for health, nutritional needs should be met primarily through foods....In some cases, fortified foods and dietary supplements are useful when it is not possible otherwise to meet needs for one or more nutrients (e.g., during specific life stages such as pregnancy)."

For more information about building a healthy dietary pattern, refer to the Dietary Guidelines for Americans and the USDA's MyPlate.

The Dietary Guidelines for Americans describes a healthy dietary pattern as one that

    Includes a variety of vegetables; fruits; grains (at least half whole grains); fat-free and low-fat milk, yogurt, and cheese; and oils.
        Milk, many ready-to-eat cereals, and some brands of yogurt and orange juice are fortified with vitamin D. Cheese naturally contains small amounts of vitamin D. Vitamin D is added to some margarines.
    Includes a variety of protein-rich foods, such as lean meats, poultry, eggs, seafood, beans, peas, lentils, nuts, seeds, and soy products.
        Fatty fish, such as salmon, tuna, and mackerel, are very good sources of vitamin D. Beef liver and egg yolks have small amounts of vitamin D.
    Limits foods and beverages that are higher in added sugars, saturated fat, and sodium.
    Limits alcoholic beverages.
    Stays within your daily calorie needs.

References

    Institute of Medicine, Food and Nutrition Board. Dietary Reference Intakes for Calcium and Vitamin D. Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 2010.
    Norman AW, Henry HH. Vitamin D. In: Erdman JW, Macdonald IA, Zeisel SH, eds. Present Knowledge in Nutrition, 10th ed. Washington DC: Wiley-Blackwell, 2012.
    Jones G. Vitamin D. In: Ross AC, Caballero B, Cousins RJ, Tucker KL, Ziegler TR, eds. Modern Nutrition in Health and Disease, 11th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2014.
    Silva MC, Furlanetto TW. Intestinal absorption of vitamin D: A systematic review. Nutr Rev 2018;76:60-76. [PubMed abstract]
    Sempos CT, Heijboer AC, Bikle DD, Bollerslev J, Bouillon R, Brannon PM, et al. Vitamin D assays and the definition of hypovitaminosis D. Results from the First International Conference on Controversies in Vitamin D. Br J Clin Pharmacol 2018;84:2194-207. [PubMed abstract]
    LeFevre ML. Screening for vitamin deficiency in adults: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med 2015;162:133-40. [PubMed abstract]
    Brooks SPJ, Sempos CT. The importance of 25-hydroxyvitamin D assay standardization and the Vitamin D Standardization Program. Journal of AOAC International 2017;100:1223-4.
    Taylor CL, Sempos CT, Davis CD, Brannon PM. Vitamin D: moving forward to address emerging science. Nutrients 2017, 9, 1308; doi:10.3390/mu9121308. [PubMed abstract]
    Sempos CT, Binkley N. 25-hydroxyvitamin D assay standardisation and vitamin D guidelines paralysis. Public Health Nutrition 2020;23:1153-64. [PubMed abstract]
    Office of Dietary Supplements, National Institutes of Health. Vitamin D Standardization Program (VDSP).
    Demay MB, Pittas AG, Bikle DD, Diab DL, Kiely ME, et al. Vitamin D for the Prevention of Disease: An Endocrine Society Clinical Practice Guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2024 Jul 12;109(8):1907-1947. [PubMed abstract]
    Shah VP, Nayfeh T, Alsawaf Y, Saadi S, Farah M, et al. A Systematic Review Supporting the Endocrine Society Clinical Practice Guidelines on Vitamin D. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2024 Jul 12;109(8):1961-1974. [PubMed abstract]
    Holick MF. Vitamin D deficiency. N Engl J Med 2007;357:266-81. [PubMed abstract]
    Brown LL, Cohen B, Tabor D, Zappala G, Maruvada P, Coates PM. The vitamin D paradox in Black Americans: A systems-based approach to investigating clinical practice, research, and public health—expert panel meeting report. BMC Proceedings, 2018;12(Suppl 6):6. [PubMed abstract]
    Bouillon R. Comparative analysis of nutritional guidelines for vitamin D. Nat Rev Endocrinol 2017;13:466-79. [PubMed abstract]
    Scientific Advisory Committee on Nutrition. Vitamin D and Health. 2016.
    Roseland JM, Phillips KM, Patterson KY, Pehrsson PR, Taylor CL. Vitamin D in foods: An evolution of knowledge. Pages 41-78 in Feldman D, Pike JW, Bouillon R, Giovannucci E, Goltzman D, Hewison M, eds. Vitamin D, Volume 2: Health, Disease and Therapeutics, Fourth Edition. Elsevier, 2018.
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Food additives permitted for direct addition to food for human consumption; vitamin D2 mushroom powder. Federal Register 2020;85:41916-20.
    Borel P, Caillaud D, Cano NJ. Vitamin D bioavailability: State of the art. Crit Rev Food Sci Nutr 2015;55:1193-205. [PubMed abstract]
    Taylor CL, Patterson KY, Roseland JM, Wise SA, Merkel JM, Pehrsson PR, Yetley EA. Including food 25-hydroxyvitamin D in intake estimates may reduce the discrepancy between dietary and serum measures of vitamin D status. J Nutr 2014;144:654-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Cashman KD, Seamans KM, Lucey AJ, Stocklin E, Weber P, Kiely M, Hill TR. Relative effectiveness of oral 25-hydroxyvitamin D3 and vitamin D3 in raising wintertime serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D in older adults. Am J Clin Nutr 2012;95:1350-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Calvo MS, Whiting SJ, Barton CN. Vitamin D fortification in the United States and Canada: Current status and data needs. Am J Clin Nutr 2004;80:1710S-6S. [PubMed abstract]
    Yetley EA. Assessing the vitamin D status of the US population. Am J Clin Nutr 2008;88:558S-64S. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Vitamin D for milk and milk alternatives. January 4, 2018.
    U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service. FoodData Central.
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Food labeling: Revision of the Nutrition and Supplement Facts labels. Federal Register 81(103):33742-33999. 2016.
    Hossein-nezhad A, Holick MF. Vitamin D for health: A global perspective. Mayo Clin Proc 2013;88:720-55. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. The Surgeon General's Call to Action to Prevent Skin Cancer. Washington, DC: U.S. Dept of Health and Human Services, Office of the Surgeon General; 2014.
    Holick MF. Vitamin D: the underappreciated D-lightful hormone that is important for skeletal and cellular health. Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes 2002;9:87-98.
    Weisberg P, Scanlon KS, Li R, Cogswell ME. Nutritional rickets among children in the United States: review of cases reported between 1986 and 2003. Am J Clin Nutr 2004;80:1697S-705S. [PubMed abstract]
    Hirsch AL. Industrial Aspects of Vitamin D. In: Feldman D, Pike JW, Adams JS, eds. Vitamin D. 3rd ed. Academic Press; 2011:73-93.
    National Institutes of Health. Dietary Supplement Label Database. 2020.
    Tripkovic L, Lambert H, Hart K, Smith CP, Bucca G, Penson S, et al. Comparison of vitamin D2 and vitamin D3 supplementation in raising serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D status: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Clin Nutr 2012;95:1357-64. [PubMed abstract]
    Lehmann U, Hirche F, Stangl GI, Hinz K, Westphal S, Dierkes J. Bioavailability of vitamin D2 and D3 in healthy volunteers, a randomised placebo-controlled trial. J Clin Endocrin Metab 2013;98:4339-45. [PubMed abstract]
    Logan VF, Gray AR, Peddie MC, Harper MJ, Houghton LA. Long-term vitamin D3 supplementation is more effective than vitamin D2 in maintaining serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D status over the winter months. Br J Nutr 2013;109:1082-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Tripkovic L, Wilson LR, Hart K, Johnsen S, de Lusignan S, Smith CP, et al. Daily supplementation with 15 µg vitamin D2 compared with vitamin D3 to increase wintertime 25-hydroxyvitamin D status in healthy South Asian and white European women: A 12-wk randomized, placebo-controlled food-fortification trial. Am J Clin Nutr 2017;106:481-90. [PubMed abstract]
    Graeff-Armas LA, Bendik I, Kunz I, Schoop R, Hull S, Beck M. Supplemental 25-hydroxycholecalciferol is more effective than cholecalciferol in raising serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D concentrations in older adults. J Nutr 2020;150:73-81. [PubMed abstract]
    Quesada-Gomez JM, Bouillon R. Is calcifediol better than cholecalciferol for vitamin D supplementation? Osteoporos Int 2018;29:1697-1711. [PubMed abstract]
    Percent reporting and mean amounts of selected vitamins and minerals food and beverages and dietary supplements by gender and age, in the United States, 2015-2016. What We Eat in America, NHANES 2015-2016. 2019.
    Usual nutrient intake from foods and beverages, by gender and age. What We Eat in America, NHANES 2013-2016. 2019.
    Rooney MR, Harnack L, Michos ED, Ogilvie RP, Sempos CT, Lutsey PL. Trends in use of high-dose vitamin D supplements exceeding 1000 or 4000 International Units daily, 1999-2014. JAMA 2017;317:2448-50. [PubMed abstract]
    Taylor CL, Roseland JM, Coates PM, Pehrsson PR. The emerging issue of 25-hydroxyvitamin D in foods. J Nutr 2016;146:855-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Herrick KA, Storandt RJ, Afful J, Pfeiffer CM, Schleicher RL, Gahche JJ, Potischman N. Vitamin D status in the United States, 2011-2014. Am J Clin Nutr 2019;110:150-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Elder CJ, Bishop NJ. Rickets. Lancet 2014;383:1665-76. [PubMed abstract]
    Munns CF, Shaw N, Kiely M, Specker BL, Thacher TD, Ozono K, et al. Global consensus recommendations on prevention and management of nutritional rickets. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2016;101:394-415. [PubMed abstract]
    Uday S, Hogler W. Nutritional rickets and osteomalacia in the twenty-first century: Revised concepts, public health, and prevention strategies. Curr Osteoporos Rep 2017;15:293-302. [PubMed abstract]
    Weisberg P, Scanlon KS, Li R, Cogswell ME. Nutritional rickets among children in the United States: Review of cases reported between 1986 and 2003. Am J Clin Nutr 2004;80:1697S-705S. [PubMed abstract]
    Thacher TM, Fischer PR, Tebben PJ, Singh RJ, Cha SS, Maxson JA, Yawn BP. Increasing incidence of nutritional rickets: A population-based study in Olmsted County, Minnesota. Mayo Clin Proc 2013;88:176-83. [PubMed abstract]
    Ward LM, Gaboury I, Ladhani M, Zlotkin S. Vitamin D-deficiency rickets among children in Canada. CMAJ 2007;177:161-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Rajakumar K. Vitamin D, cod-liver oil, sunlight, and rickets: A historical perspective. Pediatrics 2003;112:e132-5. [PubMed abstract]
    Creo AL, Thacher TD, Pettifor JM, Strand MA, Ficsher PR. Nutritional rickets around the world: An update. Paediatr Int Child Health 2017;37:84-98. [PubMed abstract]
    Rockwell M, Kraak V, Hulver M, Epling J. Clinical management of low vitamin D: A scoping review of physicians' practices. Nutrients 2018 Apr 16;10(4). pii: E493. doi: 10.3390/nu10040493. [PubMed abstract]
    Taylor CL, Thomas PR, Aloia JF, Millard PS. Questions about vitamin D for primary care practice: Input from an NIH conference. Am J Med 2015;128:1167-70. [PubMed abstract]
    Taylor CL, Rosen CJ, Dwyer JT. Considerations in dietetic counseling for vitamin D. J Acad Nutr Diet 2019;119:901-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. Screening for vitamin D deficiency: Systematic review for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommendation. Evidence Synthesis Number 118. AHRQ-Pub No. 13-05183-EF-1. June 2014.
    Picciano MF. Nutrient composition of human milk. Pediatr Clin North Am 2001;48:53-67. [PubMed abstract]
    Wagner CL, Greer FR, American Academy of Pediatrics Section on Breastfeeding, American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Nutrition. Prevention of rickets and vitamin D deficiency in infants, children, and adolescents. Pediatrics 2008;122:1142-52. [PubMed abstract]
    Dawodu A, Tsang RC. Maternal vitamin D status: Effect on milk vitamin D content and vitamin D status of breastfeeding infants. Adv Nutr 2012;3:353-61. [PubMed abstract]
    Davis CD, Dwyer JT. The 'sunshine vitamin': benefits beyond bone? J Natl Cancer Inst 2007;99:1563-5. [PubMed abstract]
    Simon AE, Ahrens KA. Adherence to vitamin D intake guidelines in the United States. Pediatrics 2020;145:e20193574. [PubMed abstract]
    Chalcraft JR, Cardinal LM, Wechsler PJ, Hollis BW, Gerow KG, Alexander BM, et al. Vitamin D synthesis following a single bout of sun exposure in older and younger men and women. Nutrients 2020; 12, 2237; doi:10.3390/nu12082237. [PubMed abstract]
    Sowah D, Fan X, Dennett L, Hagtvedt R, Straube S. Vitamin D levels and deficiency with different occupations: A systematic review. BMC Public Health 2017;17:519. [PubMed abstract]
    Pappa HM, Bern E, Kamin D, Grand RJ. Vitamin D status in gastrointestinal and liver disease. Curr Opin Gastroenterol 2008;24:176-83. [PubMed abstract]
    Drincic A, Fuller E, Heaney RP, Armas LAG. 25-hydroxyvitamin D response to graded vitamin D3 supplementation among obese adults. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2013;98:4845-51. [PubMed abstract]
    Ekwaru JP, Zwicker JD, Holick MF, Giovannucci E, Veugelers PJ. The importance of body weight for the dose response relationship of oral vitamin D supplementation and serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D in healthy volunteers. PLOS ONE 2014;9:e111265. [PubMed abstract]
    Chakhtoura M, Rahme M, Fuleihan E-H. Vitamin D metabolism in bariatric surgery. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am 2017;46:947-82. [PubMed abstract]
    Peterson L, Zeng X, Caufield-Noll CP, Schweitzer MA, Magnuson TH, Steele KE. Vitamin D status and supplementation before and after bariatric surgery: A comprehensive literature review. Surg Obes Relat Dis 2016;12:693-702. [PubMed abstract]
    Chakhtoura MT, Nakhoul N, Akl EA, Mantzoros CS, El Hajj Guleihan GA. Guidelines on vitamin D replacement in bariatric surgery? Identification and systematic appraisal. Metabolism 2016;65:586-97. [PubMed abstract]
    Newberry SJ, Chung M, Shekelle PG, Booth MS, Liu JL, Maher AR, et al. Vitamin D and calcium: A systematic review of health outcomes (update). Evidence Report/Technology Assessment No. 217. (Prepared by the Southern California Evidence-based Practice Center under Contract No. 290- 2012-00006-I.) AHRQ Publication No. 14-E004-EF. Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. September 2014.
    Sempos CT, Carter GD, Binkley NC. 25-hydroxyvitamin D assays: Standardization, guidelines, problems, and interpretation. Pages 939-57 in Feldman D, Pike JW, Bouillon R, Giovannucci E, Goltzman D, Hewison M, eds. Vitamin D, Volume 1: Biochemistry, Physiology and Diagnostics, Fourth Edition. Elsevier, 2018.
    Jin, J. Vitamin D and calcium supplements for preventing fractures. JAMA 2018;319:1630. [PubMed abstract]
    National Institutes of Health Osteoporosis and Related Bone Diseases National Resource Center. Osteoporosis Overview.
    Hansen D, Bazell C, Pelizzari P, Pyenson B. Medicare cost of osteoporotic fractures. Milliman research report, August 2019.
    Chung M, Balk EM, Brendel M, Ip S, Lau J, Lee J, et al. Vitamin D and calcium: A systematic review of health outcomes. Evidence Report/Technology Assessment No. 183 prepared by the Tufts Evidence-based Practice Center under Contract No. 290-2007-10055-I. AHRQ Publication No. 09-E015. Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, 2009.
    U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Vitamin D, calcium, or combined supplementation for the primary prevention of fractures in community-dwelling adults. US Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement. JAMA 2018;319:1592-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Kahwati LC, Weber RP, Pan H, Gourlay M, LeBlanc E, Coker-Schwimmer M, Viswanathan M. Vitamin D, calcium, or combined supplementation for the primary prevention of fractures in community-dwelling adults: Evidence report and systematic review for the US Preventive Services Task Force. JAMA 2018;319:1600-12. [PubMed abstract]
    Guirguis-Blake JM, Michael YL, Perdue LA, Coppola EL, Beil TL. Interventions to prevent falls in older adults: Updated evidence report and systematic review for the US Preventive Services Task Force. JAMA 2018;319:1705-16. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Interventions to prevent falls in community-dwelling older adults. US Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement. JAMA 2018;319:1696-1704. [PubMed abstract]
    Bolland MJ, Grey A, Avenell A. Effects of vitamin D supplementation on musculoskeletal health: A systematic review, meta-analysis, and trial sequential analysis. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2018;6:847-58. [PubMed abstract]
    Gallagher JC. Vitamin D and bone density, fractures, and falls: The end of the story? Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2018;6:834-5. [PubMed abstract]
    Yao P, Bennett D, Mafham M, Lin X, Chen Z, Armitage J, Clarke R. Vitamin D and calcium for the prevention of fracture: A systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA Network Open 2019;2(12):e1917789. doi: 10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2019.17789.
    LeBoff MS, Chou SH, Ratliff KA, Cook NR, Khurana B, Kim E, et al. Supplemental vitamin D and incident fractures in midlife and older adults. N Eng J Med 2022;387:299-309. [PubMed abstract]
    Aloia JF, Talwar SA, Pollack S, Yeh J. A randomized controlled trial of vitamin D3 supplementation in African American women. Arch Intern Med 2005;165:1618-23. [PubMed abstract]
    Aloia JF, Rubinova R, Fazzari M, Islam S, Mikhail M, Ragolia L. Vitamin D and falls in older African American women: The PODA randomized clinical trial. J Am Geriatr Soc 2019;67:1043-49. [PubMed abstract]
    Vaes AMM, Tieland M, Toussaint N, Nilwik R, Verdijk LB, van Loon LJC, de Groot CPGM. Cholecalciferol or 25-hydroxycholecalciferol supplementation does not affect muscle strength and physical performance in prefrail and frail older adults. J Nutr 2018;148:712-20. [PubMed abstract]
    Shea MK, Fielding RA, Dawson-Hughes B. The effect of vitamin D supplementation on lower-extremity power and function in older adults: a randomized controlled trial. Am J Clin Nutr 2019;109:369-79. [PubMed abstract]
    Manson JE, Bassuk SS, Buring JE. Vitamin D, calcium, and cancer: Approaching daylight? JAMA 2017;317:1217-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Yin L, Ordonez-Mena JM, Chen T, Schottker B, Arndt V, Brenner H. Circulating 25-hydroxyvitamin D serum concentration and total cancer incidence and mortality: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Preventive Medicine 2013;57:753-64. [PubMed abstract]
    Han J, Guo X, Yu X, Liu S, Cui X, Zhang B, Liang H. 25-hydroxyvitamin D and total cancer incidence and mortality: A meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies. Nutrients 2019;11,2295; doi:10.3390/nu11102295. [PubMed abstract]
    Keum N, Giovannucci E. Vitamin D supplements and cancer incidence and mortality: A meta-analysis. British Journal of Cancer 2014;111:976-80. [PubMed abstract]
    Keum N, Lee DH, Greenwood DC, Manson JE, Giovannucci E. Vitamin D supplementation and total cancer incidence and mortality: A meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Ann Oncol 2019;30:733-43. [PubMed abstract]
    Bjelakovic G, Gluud LL, Nikolova D, Whitfield K, Krstic G, Wetterslev J, Gluud C. Vitamin D supplementation for prevention of cancer in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2014; 23(6):CD007469. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD007469.pub2. [PubMed abstract]
    Manson JE, Cook NR, Lee I-M, Christen W, Bassuk S, Mora S, et al. Vitamin D supplements and prevention of cancer and cardiovascular disease. N Engl J Med 2019:380:33-44. [PubMed abstract]
    Brunner RL, Wactawski-Wende J, Caan BJ, Cochrane BB, Chlebowski RT, et al. The effect of calcium plus vitamin D on risk for invasive cancer: results of the Women's Health Initiative (WHI) calcium plus vitamin D randomized clinical trial. Nutr Cancer. 2011;63(6):827-41.  [PubMed abstract]
    Thomson CA, Aragaki AK, Prentice RL, Stefanick ML, Manson JE, et al. Long-Term Effect of Randomization to Calcium and Vitamin D Supplementation on Health in Older Women : Postintervention Follow-up of a Randomized Clinical Trial. Ann Intern Med. 2024 Apr;177(4):428-438.  [PubMed abstract]
    McNamara M, Rosenberger KD. The significance of vitamin D status in breast cancer: A state of the science review. J Midwifery Womens Health 2019;64:276-88. [PubMed abstract]
    O'Brien KM, Sandler DP, Taylor JA, Weinberg CR. Serum vitamin D and risk of breast cancer within five years. Environ Health Perspect 2017;125(7):077004. [PubMed abstract]
    Skaaby T, Husemoen LLN, Thuesen BH, Pisinger C, Jorgensen T, Roswall N, et al. Prospective population-based study of the association between serum 25-hydroxyvitamin-D levels and the incidence of specific types of cancer. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2014;23:1220-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Yao S, Kwan ML, Ergas IJ, Roh JM, Cheng T-YD, Hong C-C, et al. Association of serum level of vitamin D at diagnosis with breast cancer survival: A case-cohort analysis in the Pathways Study. JAMA Oncol 2017;3:351-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Chlebowski RT, Johnson KC, Kooperberg C, Pettinger M, Wactawski-Wende J, Rohan T, et al. Calcium plus vitamin D supplementation and the risk of breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 2007;100:1581-91. [PubMed abstract]
    Cauley JA, Chlebowski RT, Wactawski-Wende J, Robbins JA, Rodabough RJ, Chen Z, et al. Calcium plus vitamin D supplementation and health outcomes five years after active intervention ended: The Women's Health Initiative. J Womens Health 2013:22,915-29. [PubMed abstract]
    McCullough ML, Zoltick ES, Weinstein SJ, Fedirko V, Wang M, Cook NR, et al. Circulating vitamin D and colorectal cancer risk: An international pooling project of 17 cohorts. J Natl Cancer Inst 2019;111:158-69. [PubMed abstract]
    Wactawski-Wende J, Kotchen JM, Anderson GL, Assaf AR, Brunner RL, O'Sullivan MJ, et al. Calcium plus vitamin D supplementation and the risk of colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med 2006;354:684-96. [PubMed abstract]
    Crockett SD, Barry EL, Mott LA, Ahnen DJ, Robertson DJ, Anderson JC, et al. Calcium and vitamin D supplementation and increased risk of serrated polyps: Results from a randomised clinical trial. Gut. 2019 Mar;68(3):475-486. [PubMed abstract]
    Song M, Lee IM, Manson JE, Buring JE, Dushkes R, Gordon D, et al. No association between vitamin D supplementation and risk of colorectal adenomas or serrated polyps in a randomized trial. Clin Gastroeterol Hepatol 2020. [PubMed abstract]
    Muller DC, Hodge AM, Fanidi A, Albanes D, Mai XM, Shu XO, et al. No association between circulating concentrations of vitamin D and risk of lung cancer: An analysis in 20 prospective studies in the Lung Cancer Cohort Consortium (LC3). Ann Oncol 2018;29:1468-75. [PubMed abstract]
    van Duijnhoven FJB, Jenab M, Hveem K, Siersema PD, Fedirko V, Duell EJ, et al. Circulating concentrations of vitamin D in relation to pancreatic cancer risk in European populations. Int J Cancer 2018;142:1189-201. [PubMed abstract]
    Stolzenberg-Solomon RZ, Vieth R, Azad A, Pietinen P, Taylor PR, Virtamo J, et al. A prospective nested case-control study of vitamin D status and pancreatic cancer risk in male smokers. Cancer Res 2006;66:10213-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Helzlsouer KJ for the VDPP Steering Committee. Overview of the Cohort Consortium Vitamin D Pooling Project of Rarer Cancers. Am J Epidemiol 2010;172:4-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Xu Y, Shao X, Yao Y, Xu L, Chang L, Jiang Z, Lin Z. Positive association between circulating 25-hydroxyvitamin D levels and prostate cancer risk: New findings from an updated meta-analysis. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol 2014;140:1465-77. [PubMed abstract]
    Kristal AR, Till C, Song X, Tangen CM, Goodman PJ, Neuhauser ML, et al. Plasma vitamin D and prostate cancer risk: Results from the Selenium and Vitamin E Cancer Prevention Trial. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2014;23:1494-504. [PubMed abstract]
    Schenk JM, Till CA, Tangen CM, Goodman PJ, Song X, Torkko KC, et al. Serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D concentrations and risk of prostate cancer: Results from the Prostate Cancer Prevention Trial. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2014;23:1484-93. [PubMed abstract]
    Heath AK, Hodge AM, Ebeling PR, Eyles DW, Kvaskoff D, Buchanan DD, et al. Circulating 25-hydroxyvitamin D concentration and risk of breast, prostate, and colorectal cancers: The Melbourne Collaborative Cohort Study. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2019;28:900-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Jiang X, Dimou NL, Al-Dabhani K, Lewis SJ, Martin RM, Haycock PC, et al. Circulating vitamin D concentrations and risk of breast and prostate cancer: A Mendelian randomization study. International Journal of Epidemiology 2019;48:1416-24. [PubMed abstract]
    Travis RC, Perez-Cornago A, Appleby PN, Albanes D, Joshu CE, Lutsey PL, et al. A collaborative analysis of individual participant data from 19 prospective studies assesses circulating vitamin D and prostate cancer risk. Cancer Res 2019;79:274-85. [PubMed abstract]
    Nair-Shalliker V, Bang A, Egger S, Clements M, Gardiner RA, Kricker A, et al. Post-treatment levels of plasma 25- and 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D and mortality in men with aggressive prostate cancer. Scientific Reports 2020;10:7736. [PubMed abstract]
    Song Z-y, Yao Q, Zhuo Z, Ma Z, Chen G. Circulating vitamin D level and mortality in prostate cancer patients: A dose-response meta-analysis. Endocrine Connections 2018;7:R294-303. [PubMed abstract]
    Shahvazi S, Soltani S, Ahmadi SM, de Souza RJ, Salehi-Abargouei A. The effect of vitamin D supplementation on prostate cancer: A systematic review and meta-analysis of clinical trials. Horm Metab Res 2019;51:11-21. [PubMed abstract]
    US Preventive Services Task Force; Mangione CM, Barry MJ, Nicholson WK, Cabana M, et al. Vitamin, Mineral, and Multivitamin Supplementation to Prevent Cardiovascular Disease and Cancer: US Preventive Services Task Force Recommendation Statement. JAMA. 2022 Jun 21;327(23):2326-2333. [PubMed abstract]
    Kassi E, Adamopoulos C, Basdra EK, Papavassiliou AG. Role of vitamin D in atherosclerosis. Circulation 2013;128:2517-31. [PubMed abstract]
    Mheid IA, Quyyumi AA. Vitamin D and cardiovascular disease: Controversy unresolved. J Am Coll Cardiol 2017;70:89-100. [PubMed abstract]
    Zhang R, Li B, Gao X, Tian R, Pan Y, Jiang Y, et al. Serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D and the risk of cardiovascular disease: Dose-response meta-analysis of prospective studies. Am J Clin Nutr 2017;105:810-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Durup D, Jorgensen HL, Christensen J, Tjonnland A, Olsen A, Halkjaer J, et al. A reverse J-shaped association between serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D and cardiovascular disease mortality: The CopD study. J Clin Endorcinol Metab 2015;100:2339-46. [PubMed abstract]
    Brondum-Jacobsen P, Benn M, Jensen GB, Nordestgaard BG. 25-hydroxyvitamin D levels and risk of ischemic heart disease, myocardial infarction, and early death: Population-based study and meta-analyses of 18 and 17 studies. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 2012;32:2794-802. [PubMed abstract]
    Zhou R, Wang M, Huang H, Li W, Hu Y, Wu T. Lower vitamin D status is associated with an increased risk of ischemic stroke: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Nutrients 2018; 10, 277;doi:10.3390/nu10030277. [PubMed abstract]
    Scragg R, Stewart AW, Waayer D, Lawes CMM, Toop L, Sluyter J, et al. Effect of monthly high-dose vitamin D supplementation on cardiovascular disease in the Vitamin D Assessment Study: A randomized clinical trial. JAMA Cardiol 2017;2:608-16. [PubMed abstract]
    Ford JA, MacLennan GS, Avenell A, Bolland M, Grey A, Witham M. Cardiovascular disease and vitamin D supplementation: Trial analysis, systematic review, and meta-analysis. Am J Clin Nutr 2014;100:746-55. [PubMed abstract]
    Hsia J, Heiss G, Ren H, Allison M, Dolan NC, et al. Calcium/vitamin D supplementation and cardiovascular events. Circulation. 2007 Feb 20;115(7):846-54.  [PubMed abstract]
    Dibaba DT. Effect of vitamin D supplementation on serum lipid profiles: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Nutr Rev 2019;77:890-902. [PubMed abstract]
    Beveridge LA, Struthers AD, Khan F, Jorde R, Scragg R, Macdonald HM, et al. Effect of vitamin D supplementation on blood pressure: A systematic review and meta-analysis incorporating individual patient data. JAMA Intern Med 2015;175:745-54. [PubMed abstract]
    Golzarand M, Shab-Bidar S, Koochakpoor G, Speakman JR, Djafarian K. Effect of vitamin D3 supplementation on blood pressure in adults: An updated meta-analysis. Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis 2016;26:663-73. [PubMed abstract]
    Vimaleswaran KS, Cavadino A, Berry DJ, Jorde R, Dieffenbach AK, Lu C, et al. Association of vitamin D status with arterial blood pressure and hypertension risk: A mendelian randomisation study. Lancet Diabetes-Endocrinol 2014;2:719-29. [PubMed abstract]
    Anglin RES, Samaan Z, Walter SD, McDonald SD. Vitamin D deficiency and depression in adults: Systematic review and meta-analysis. The British Journal of Psychiatry 2013;202:100-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Gowda U, Mutowo MP, Smith BJ, Wluka AE, Renzaho AMN. Vitamin D supplementation to reduce depression in adults: Meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Nutrition 2015;31:421-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Jorde R, Kubiak J. No improvement in depressive symptoms by vitamin D supplementation: Results from a randomised controlled trial. Journal of Nutrition Science 2018;7:1-7. [PubMed abstract]
    de Koning EJ, Lips P, Penninx BWJH, Elders PJM, Heijboer AC, den Heijer M, et al. Vitamin D supplementation for the prevention of depression and poor physical function in older persons: The D-Vitaal study, a randomized clinical trial. Am J Clin Nutr 2019;110:1119-30. [PubMed abstract]
    Jorde R, Grimnes G. Vitamin D: No cure for depression. Am J Clin Nutr 2019;110:1043-4. PMID: 31504098 [PubMed abstract]
    Okereke OI, Reynolds III CF, Mischoulon D, Chang G, Vyas CM, Cook NR, et al. Effect of long-term vitamin D3 supplementation vs placebo on risk of depression or clinically relevant depressive symptoms and on change in mood scores: A randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2020;324:471-80. [PubMed abstract]
    MedLinePlus. Multiple sclerosis. 2020.
    Jagannath VA, Filippini G, Di Pietrantonj C, Asokan GV, Robak EW, Whamond L, Robinson SA. Vitamin D for the management of multiple sclerosis (review). Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2018, issue 9, Art. No.: CD008422. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD008422.pub3. [PubMed abstract]
    Sintzel MB, Rametta M, Reder AT. Vitamin D and multiple sclerosis: A comprehensive review. Neurol Ther 2018;7:59-85. [PubMed abstract]
    Munger K, Hongell K, Aivo J, Soilu-Hanninen M, Surcel H-M, Ascherio A. 25-hydroxyvitamin D deficiency and risk of MS among women in the Finnish Maternity Cohort. Neurology 2017;89: 1578-83. [PubMed abstract]
    Munger KL, Levin LI, Hollis BW, Howard NS, Ascherio A. Serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D levels and risk of multiple sclerosis. JAMA 2006;296:2832-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Salzer J, Hallmans G, Nystrom M, Stenlund H. Wadell G, Sundstrom P. Vitamin D as a protective factor in multiple sclerosis. Neurology 2012;79:2140-5. [PubMed abstract]
    Marrie RA, Beck CA. Preventing multiple sclerosis: To (take) vitamin D or not to (take) vitamin D? Neurology 2017;89:1538-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Li X, Liu Y, Zheng Y, Wang P, Zhang Y. The effect of vitamin D supplementation on glycemic control in type 2 diabetes patients: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Nutrients 2018; 10, 375; doi:10.3390/nu10030375 [PubMed abstract]
    Mousa A, Naderpoor N, Teede H, Scragg R, de Courten, B. Vitamin D supplementation for improvement of chronic low-grade inflammation in patients with type 2 diabetes: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Nutr Rev 2018;76:380-94. [PubMed abstract]
    Pittas A, Dawson-Hughes B, Sheehan P, Ware JH, Knowler WC, Aroda VR, et al. Vitamin D supplementation and prevention of type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2019;381:520-30. [PubMed abstract]
    Rafiq S, Jeppesen PB. Is hypovitaminosis D related to incidence of type 2 diabetes and high fasting glucose level in healthy subjects: A systematic review and meta-analysis of observational studies. Nutrients 2018, 10, 59; doi:10.3390/nu10010059. [PubMed abstract]
    Mousa A, Naderpoor N, de Courten MPJ, Teede H, Kellow N, Walker K, et al. Vitamin D supplementation has no effect on insulin sensitivity or secretion in vitamin D-deficient, overweight or obese adults: A randomized placebo-controlled trial. Am J Clin Nutr 2017;105:1372-81. [PubMed abstract]
    Seida JC, Mitri J, Colmers IN, Majumdar SR, Davidson MB, Edwards AL, et al. Effect of vitamin D3 supplementation on improving glucose homeostasis and preventing diabetes: A systematic review and meta-analysis. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2014;99:3551-60. [PubMed abstract]
    Jorde R, Sollid ST, Svartberg J, Schirmer H, Joakimsen RM, Njolstad I, et al. Vitamin D 20 000 IU per week for five years does not prevent progression from prediabetes to diabetes. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2016;101:1647-55. [PubMed abstract]
    Pittas A, Dawson-Hughes B, Staten M. The authors reply: Vitamin D supplementation and prevention of type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2019;381:1785-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Earthman CP, Beckman LM, Masodkar K, Sibley SD. The link between obesity and low circulating 25-hydroxyvitamin D concentrations: considerations and implications. Int J Obes (Lond) 2012;36:387-96. [PubMed abstract]
    Mallard SR, Howe AS, Houghton LA. Vitamin D status and weight loss: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized and nonrandomized controlled weight-loss trials. Am J Clin Nutr 2016;104:1151-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Caan B, Neuhouser M, Aragaki A, Lewis CB, Jackson R, LeBoff MS, et al. Calcium plus vitamin D supplementation and the risk of postmenopausal weight gain. Arch Intern Med 2007;167:893-902. [PubMed abstract]
    Pathak K, Soares MJ, Calton EK, Zhao Y, Hallett J. Vitamin D supplementation and body weight status: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Obes Rev 2014;15:528-37. [PubMed abstract]
    Galior K, Grebe S, Singh R. Development of vitamin D toxicity from overcorrection of vitamin D deficiency: A review of case reports. Nutrients 2018, 10, 953. [PubMed abstract]
    Auguste BL, Avila-Casado C, Bargman JM. Use of vitamin D drops leading to kidney failure in a 54-year-old man. CMAJ 2019;191:E390-4. [PubMed abstract]
    Vogiatzi MG, Jacobson-Dickman E, DeBoer MD. Vitamin D supplementation and risk of toxicity in pediatrics: A review of current literature. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2014;99:1132-41. [PubMed abstract]
    Singh P, Trivedi N. Tanning beds and hypervitaminosis D: A case report. Ann Intern Med 2014;160:810-1. [PubMed abstract]
    Laurent MR, Gielen E, Pauwels S, Vanderschueren D, Bouillon R. Hypervitaminosis D associated with tanning bed use: A case report. Ann Intern Med 2017;166:155-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Perez-Castrillon JL, Vega G, Abad L, Sanz A, Chaves J, Hernandez G, Duenas A. Effects of atorvastatin on vitamin D levels in patients with acute ischemic heart disease. Am J Cardiol 2007;99:903-5. [PubMed abstract]
    Jackson RD, LaCroix AZ, Gass M, Wallace RB, Robbins J, Lewis CE, et al. Calcium plus vitamin D supplementation and the risk of fractures. N Engl J Med 2006;354:669-82. [PubMed abstract]
    Malihi Z, Lawes CMM, Wu Z, Huang Y, Waayer D, Toop L, et al. Monthly high-dose vitamin D supplementation does not increase kidney stone risk or serum calcium: Results from a randomized controlled trial. Am J Clin Nutr 2019;109:1578-87. [PubMed abstract]
    Malihi Z, Wu Z, Stewart AW, Lawes CMM, Scragg R. Hypercalcemia, hypercalciuria, and kidney stones in long-term studies of vitamin D supplementation: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Clin Nutr 2016;104:1039-51. [PubMed abstract]
    Gotfredsen A, Westergren Hendel H, Andersen T. Influence of orlistat on bone turnover and body composition. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord 2001;25:1154-60. [PubMed abstract]
    James WP, Avenell A, Broom J, Whitehead J. A one-year trial to assess the value of orlistat in the management of obesity. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord 1997;21:S24-30. [PubMed abstract]
    McDuffie JR, Calis KA, Booth SL, Uwaifo GI, Yanovski JA. Effects of orlistat on fat-soluble vitamins in obese adolescents. Pharmacotherapy 2002;22:814-22. [PubMed abstract]
    Robien K, Oppeneer SJ, Kelly JA, Hamilton-Reeves JM. Drug-vitamin D interactions: A systematic review of the literature. Nutr Clin Pract 2013;28:194-208. [PubMed abstract]
    Schwartz JB. Effects of vitamin D supplementation in atorvastatin-treated patients: A new drug interaction with an unexpected consequence. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2009;85:198-203. [PubMed abstract]
    Perez-Castrillon JL, Vega G, Abad L, Sanz A, Chaves J, Hernandez G, Duenas A. Effects of atorvastatin on vitamin D levels in patients with acute ischemic heart disease. Am J Cardiol 2007;99:903-5. [PubMed abstract]
    Aloia JF, Li-Ng M, Pollack S. Statins and vitamin D. Am J Cardiol 2007;100:1329. [PubMed abstract]
    Buckley LM, Leib ES, Cartularo KS, Vacek PM, Cooper SM. Calcium and vitamin D3 supplementation prevents bone loss in the spine secondary to low-dose corticosteroids in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Ann Intern Med 1996;125:961-8. [PubMed abstract]
    de Sevaux RGL, Hoitsma AJ, Corstens FHM, Wetzels JFM. Treatment with vitamin D and calcium reduces bone loss after renal transplantation: a randomized study. J Am Soc Nephrol 2002;13:1608-14. [PubMed abstract]
    Lukert BP, Raisz LG. Glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis: pathogenesis and management. Ann Intern Med 1990;112:352-64. [PubMed abstract]
    Skversky AL, Kumar J, Abramowitz MK, Kaskel FJ, Melamed ML. Association of glucocorticoid use and low 25-hydroxyvitamin D levels: Results from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES): 2001-2006. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2011;96:3838-45. [PubMed abstract]
    Drinka PJ, Nolten WE. Hazards of treating osteoporosis and hypertension concurrently with calcium, vitamin D, and distal diuretics. J Am Geriatr Soc 1984;32:405-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Crowe M, Wollner L, Griffiths RA. Hypercalcaemia following vitamin D and thiazide therapy in the elderly. Practitioner 1984;228:312-3. [PubMed abstract]

Disclaimer

This fact sheet by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Office of Dietary Supplements (ODS) provides information that should not take the place of medical advice. We encourage you to talk to your health care providers (doctor, registered dietitian, pharmacist, etc.) about your interest in, questions about, or use of dietary supplements and what may be best for your overall health. Any mention in this publication of a specific product or service, or recommendation from an organization or professional society, does not represent an endorsement by ODS of that product, service, or expert advice.

Updated: June 27, 2025


 Vitamin E: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals (original version)
Vitamin E: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals
Table of Contents

    Introduction
    Recommended Intakes
    Sources of Vitamin E
    Vitamin E Intakes and Status
    Vitamin E Deficiency
    Vitamin E and Health
    Health Risks from Excessive Vitamin E
    Interactions with Medications
    Vitamin E and Healthful Diets
    References
    Disclaimer

Introduction

Vitamin E is found naturally in some foods, added to others, and available as a dietary supplement. Vitamin E is the collective name for a group of fat-soluble compounds with distinctive antioxidant activities [1].

Naturally occurring vitamin E exists in eight chemical forms (alpha-, beta-, gamma-, and delta-tocopherol and alpha-, beta-, gamma-, and delta-tocotrienol) that have varying levels of biological activity [1]. Alpha- (or α-) tocopherol is the only form that is recognized to meet human requirements.

Serum concentrations of vitamin E (alpha-tocopherol) depend on the liver, which takes up the nutrient after the various forms are absorbed from the small intestine. The liver preferentially resecretes only alpha-tocopherol via the hepatic alpha-tocopherol transfer protein [1]; the liver metabolizes and excretes the other vitamin E forms [2]. As a result, blood and cellular concentrations of other forms of vitamin E are lower than those of alpha-tocopherol and have been the subjects of less research [3,4].

Antioxidants protect cells from the damaging effects of free radicals, which are molecules that contain an unshared electron. Free radicals damage cells and might contribute to the development of cardiovascular disease and cancer [5]. Unshared electrons are highly energetic and react rapidly with oxygen to form reactive oxygen species (ROS). The body forms ROS endogenously when it converts food to energy, and antioxidants might protect cells from the damaging effects of ROS. The body is also exposed to free radicals from environmental exposures, such as cigarette smoke, air pollution, and ultraviolet radiation from the sun. ROS are part of signaling mechanisms among cells.

Vitamin E is a fat-soluble antioxidant that stops the production of ROS formed when fat undergoes oxidation. Scientists are investigating whether, by limiting free-radical production and possibly through other mechanisms, vitamin E might help prevent or delay the chronic diseases associated with free radicals.

In addition to its activities as an antioxidant, vitamin E is involved in immune function and, as shown primarily by in vitro studies of cells, cell signaling, regulation of gene expression, and other metabolic processes [1]. Alpha-tocopherol inhibits the activity of protein kinase C, an enzyme involved in cell proliferation and differentiation in smooth muscle cells, platelets, and monocytes [6]. Vitamin-E-replete endothelial cells lining the interior surface of blood vessels are better able to resist blood cell components adhering to this surface. Vitamin E also increases the expression of two enzymes that suppress arachidonic acid metabolism, thereby increasing the release of prostacyclin from the endothelium, which, in turn, dilates blood vessels and inhibits platelet aggregation [6].
Recommended Intakes

Intake recommendations for vitamin E and other nutrients are provided in the Dietary Reference Intakes (DRIs) developed by the Food and Nutrition Board (FNB) at the Institute of Medicine of The National Academies (formerly National Academy of Sciences) [6]. DRI is the general term for a set of reference values used to plan and assess nutrient intakes of healthy people. These values, which vary by age and gender, include the following:

    Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA): Average daily level of intake sufficient to meet the nutrient requirements of nearly all (97%–98%) healthy individuals; often used to plan nutritionally adequate diets for individuals
    Adequate Intake (AI): Intake at this level is assumed to ensure nutritional adequacy; established when evidence is insufficient to develop an RDA
    Estimated Average Requirement (EAR): Average daily level of intake estimated to meet the requirements of 50% of healthy individuals; usually used to assess the nutrient intakes of groups of people and to plan nutritionally adequate diets for them; can also be used to assess the nutrient intakes of individuals
    Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL): Maximum daily intake unlikely to cause adverse health effects

The FNB's vitamin E recommendations are for alpha-tocopherol alone, the only form maintained in plasma. The FNB based these recommendations primarily on serum levels of the nutrient that provide adequate protection in a test measuring the survival of erythrocytes when exposed to hydrogen peroxide, a free radical [6]. Acknowledging great uncertainties in these data, the FNB has called for research to identify other biomarkers for assessing vitamin E requirements.

Naturally sourced vitamin E is called RRR-alpha-tocopherol (commonly labeled as d-alpha-tocopherol); the synthetically produced form is all rac-alpha-tocopherol (commonly labeled as dl-alpha-tocopherol).

RDAs for vitamin E are provided in milligrams (mg) and are listed in Table 1. One mg vitamin E (alpha-tocopherol) is equivalent to 1 mg RRR-alpha-tocopherol or 2 mg all rac-alpha-tocopherol. Because insufficient data are available to develop RDAs for infants, AIs were developed based on the amount of vitamin E consumed by healthy breastfed babies.
Table 1: Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDAs) for Vitamin E (Alpha-Tocopherol) [6] Age 	Males 	Females 	Pregnancy 	Lactation
0–6 months* 	4 mg 	4 mg 		
7–12 months* 	5 mg 	5 mg 		
1–3 years 	6 mg 	6 mg 		
4–8 years 	7 mg 	7 mg 		
9–13 years 	11 mg 	11 mg 		
14+ years 	15 mg 	15 mg 	15 mg 	19 mg

*Adequate Intake (AI)
International Units and Milligrams

Vitamin E is listed on the new Nutrition Facts and Supplement Facts labels in mg [7]. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) required manufacturers to use these new labels starting in January 2020, but companies with annual sales of less than $10 million were allowed to use the old labels that list vitamin E in International Units (IUs) until January 2021 [8]. Conversion rules are as follows:

    To convert from mg to IU:
        1 mg of alpha-tocopherol is equivalent to 1.49 IU of the natural form or 2.22 IU of the synthetic form.
    To convert from IU to mg:
        1 IU of the natural form is equivalent to 0.67 mg of alpha-tocopherol.
        ​​​​​​​1 IU of the synthetic form is equivalent to 0.45 mg of alpha-tocopherol.

For example, 15 mg of natural alpha-tocopherol would equal 22.4 IU (15 mg x 1.49 IU/mg = 22.4 IU). The corresponding value for synthetic alpha-tocopherol would be 33.3 IU (15 mg x 2.22 IU/mg).
Sources of Vitamin E
Food

Numerous foods provide vitamin E. Nuts, seeds, and vegetable oils are among the best sources of alpha-tocopherol, and significant amounts are available in green leafy vegetables and fortified cereals (see Table 2 for a more detailed list) [9]. Most vitamin E in American diets is in the form of gamma-tocopherol from soybean, canola, corn, and other vegetable oils and food products [4].
Table 2: Vitamin E (Alpha-Tocopherol) Content of Selected Foods [9] Food 	Milligrams (mg)
per serving 	Percent DV*
Wheat germ oil, 1 tablespoon 	20.3 	135
Sunflower seeds, dry roasted, 1 ounce 	7.4 	49
Almonds, dry roasted, 1 ounce 	6.8 	45
Sunflower oil, 1 tablespoon 	5.6 	37
Safflower oil, 1 tablespoon 	4.6 	31
Hazelnuts, dry roasted, 1 ounce 	4.3 	29
Peanut butter, 2 tablespoons 	2.9 	19
Peanuts, dry roasted, 1 ounce 	2.2 	15
Corn oil, 1 tablespoon 	1.9 	13
Spinach, boiled, ½ cup 	1.9 	13
Broccoli, chopped, boiled, ½ cup 	1.2 	8
Soybean oil, 1 tablespoon 	1.1 	7
Kiwifruit, 1 medium 	1.1 	7
Mango, sliced, ½ cup 	0.7 	5
Tomato, raw, 1 medium 	0.7 	5
Spinach, raw, 1 cup 	0.6 	4

*DV = Daily Value. FDA developed DVs to help consumers compare the nutrient contents of foods and dietary supplements within the context of a total diet. The DV for vitamin E is 15 mg for adults and children age 4 years and older [7]. One mg vitamin E = 1 mg RRR-alpha-tocopherol = 2 mg all rac-alpha-tocopherol. FDA does not require food labels to list vitamin E content unless vitamin E has been added to the food. Foods providing 20% or more of the DV are considered to be high sources of a nutrient, but foods providing lower percentages of the DV also contribute to a healthful diet.

The U.S. Department of Agriculture's (USDA's) FoodData Central website lists the nutrient content of many foods, including, in some cases, the amounts of alpha-, beta-, gamma-, and delta-tocopherol. The USDA also provides a comprehensive list of foods containing vitamin E arranged by nutrient content and by food name.
Dietary supplements

Supplements of vitamin E typically provide only alpha-tocopherol, although mixed products containing other tocopherols and even tocotrienols are available. Naturally occurring alpha-tocopherol exists in one stereoisomeric form. In contrast, synthetically produced alpha-tocopherol contains equal amounts of its eight possible stereoisomers; serum and tissues maintain only four of these stereoisomers [6]. A given amount of synthetic alpha-tocopherol (all rac-alpha-tocopherol; commonly labeled as DL or dl) is therefore only half as active as the same amount (by weight in mg) of the natural form (RRR-alpha-tocopherol; commonly labeled as D or d).

Most vitamin-E-only supplements provide ≥67 mg (100 IU of natural vitamin E) of the nutrient. These amounts are substantially higher than the RDAs.

Alpha-tocopherol in dietary supplements and fortified foods is often esterified to prolong its shelf life while protecting its antioxidant properties. The body hydrolyzes and absorbs these esters (alpha-tocopheryl acetate and succinate) as efficiently as alpha-tocopherol [6].
Vitamin E Intakes and Status

Three national surveys—the 2001–2002 National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) [10], NHANES III (1988–1994) [10], and the Continuing Survey of Food Intakes by Individuals (1994–1996) [11]—have found that the diets of most Americans provide less than the RDA levels of vitamin E. These intake estimates might be low, however, because the amounts and types of fat added during cooking are often unknown and not accounted for [6].

The FNB suggests that mean intakes of vitamin E among healthy adults are probably higher than the RDA but cautions that low-fat diets might provide insufficient amounts unless people make their food choices carefully by, for example, increasing their intakes of nuts, seeds, fruits, and vegetables [6,10]. The 1999–2000 NHANES found that 11.3% of adults took vitamin E supplements containing at least 400 IU [12].
Vitamin E Deficiency

Frank vitamin E deficiency is rare and overt deficiency symptoms have not been found in healthy people who obtain little vitamin E from their diets [6]. Premature babies of very low birth weight (<1,500 grams) might be deficient in vitamin E. Vitamin E supplementation in these infants might reduce the risk of some complications, such as those affecting the retina, but they can also increase the risk of infections [13].

Because the digestive tract requires fat to absorb vitamin E, people with fat-malabsorption disorders are more likely to become deficient than people without such disorders. Deficiency symptoms include peripheral neuropathy, ataxia, skeletal myopathy, retinopathy, and impairment of the immune response [6,14]. People with Crohn's disease, cystic fibrosis, or an inability to secrete bile from the liver into the digestive tract, for example, often pass greasy stools or have chronic diarrhea; as a result, they sometimes require water-soluble forms of vitamin E, such as tocopheryl polyethylene glycol-1000 succinate [1].

Some people with abetalipoproteinemia, a rare inherited disorder resulting in poor absorption of dietary fat, require enormous doses of supplemental vitamin E (approximately 100 mg/kg or 5–10 g/day) [1]. Vitamin E deficiency secondary to abetalipoproteinemia causes such problems as poor transmission of nerve impulses, muscle weakness, and retinal degeneration that leads to blindness [15]. Ataxia and vitamin E deficiency (AVED) is another rare, inherited disorder in which the liver's alpha-tocopherol transfer protein is defective or absent. People with AVED have such severe vitamin E deficiency that they develop nerve damage and lose the ability to walk unless they take large doses of supplemental vitamin E [16].
Vitamin E and Health

Many claims have been made about vitamin E's potential to promote health and prevent and treat disease. The mechanisms by which vitamin E might provide this protection include its function as an antioxidant and its roles in anti-inflammatory processes, inhibition of platelet aggregation, and immune enhancement.

A primary barrier to characterizing the roles of vitamin E in health is the lack of validated biomarkers for vitamin E intake and status to help relate intakes to valid predictors of clinical outcomes [6]. This section focuses on four diseases and disorders in which vitamin E might be involved: heart disease, cancer, eye disorders, and cognitive decline.
Coronary heart disease

Evidence that vitamin E could help prevent or delay coronary heart disease (CHD) comes from several sources. In vitro studies have found that the nutrient inhibits oxidation of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol, thought to be a crucial initiating step for atherosclerosis [6]. Vitamin E might also help prevent the formation of blood clots that could lead to a heart attack or venous thromboembolism [17].

Several observational studies have associated lower rates of heart disease with higher vitamin E intakes. One study of approximately 90,000 nurses found that the incidence of heart disease was 30% to 40% lower in those with the highest intakes of vitamin E, primarily from supplements [18]. Among a group of 5,133 Finnish men and women followed for a mean of 14 years, higher vitamin E intakes from food were associated with decreased mortality from CHD [19].

However, randomized clinical trials cast doubt on the efficacy of vitamin E supplements to prevent CHD [20]. For example, the Heart Outcomes Prevention Evaluation (HOPE) study, which followed almost 10,000 patients at high risk of heart attack or stroke for 4.5 years [21], found that participants taking 400 IU/day of natural vitamin E (268 mg) experienced no fewer cardiovascular events or hospitalizations for heart failure or chest pain than participants taking a placebo. In the HOPE-TOO follow-up study, almost 4,000 of the original participants continued to take vitamin E or placebo for an additional 2.5 years [22]. HOPE-TOO found that vitamin E provided no significant protection against heart attacks, strokes, unstable angina, or deaths from cardiovascular disease or other causes after 7 years of treatment. Participants taking vitamin E, however, were 13% more likely to experience, and 21% more likely to be hospitalized for, heart failure, a statistically significant but unexpected finding not reported in other large studies.

The HOPE and HOPE-TOO trials provide compelling evidence that moderately high doses of vitamin E supplements do not reduce the risk of serious cardiovascular events among men and women >50 years of age with established heart disease or diabetes [23]. These findings are supported by evidence from the Women's Angiographic Vitamin and Estrogen study, in which 423 postmenopausal women with some degree of coronary stenosis took supplements with 400 IU vitamin E (form not specified) and 500 mg vitamin C twice a day or placebo for >4 years [24]. Not only did the supplements provide no cardiovascular benefits, but all-cause mortality was significantly higher in the women taking the supplements.

The latest published clinical trial of vitamin E's effects on the heart and blood vessels of women included almost 40,000 healthy women ≥45 years of age who were randomly assigned to receive either 600 IU of natural vitamin E (402 mg) on alternate days or placebo and who were followed for an average of 10 years [25]. The investigators found no significant differences in rates of overall cardiovascular events (combined nonfatal heart attacks, strokes, and cardiovascular deaths) or all-cause mortality between the groups. However, the study did find two positive and significant results for women taking vitamin E: they had a 24% reduction in cardiovascular death rates, and those ≥65 years of age had a 26% decrease in nonfatal heart attack and a 49% decrease in cardiovascular death rates.

The most recent published clinical trial of vitamin E and men's cardiovascular health included almost 15,000 healthy physicians ≥50 years of age who were randomly assigned to receive 400 IU synthetic alpha-tocopherol (180 mg) every other day, 500 mg vitamin C daily, both vitamins, or placebo [26]. During a mean follow-up period of 8 years, intake of vitamin E (and/or vitamin C) had no effect on the incidence of major cardiovascular events, myocardial infarction, stroke, or cardiovascular morality. Furthermore, use of vitamin E was associated with a significantly increased risk of hemorrhagic stroke.

In general, clinical trials have not provided evidence that routine use of vitamin E supplements prevents cardiovascular disease or reduces its morbidity and mortality. However, participants in these studies have been largely middle-aged or elderly individuals with demonstrated heart disease or risk factors for heart disease. Some researchers have suggested that understanding the potential utility of vitamin E in preventing CHD might require longer studies in younger participants taking higher doses of the supplement [27]. Further research is needed to determine whether supplemental vitamin E has any protective value for younger, healthier people at no obvious risk of CHD.
Cancer

Antioxidant nutrients like vitamin E protect cell constituents from the damaging effects of free radicals that, if unchecked, might contribute to cancer development [9]. Vitamin E might also block the formation of carcinogenic nitrosamines formed in the stomach from nitrites in foods and protect against cancer by enhancing immune function [28]. Unfortunately, human trials and surveys that have attempted to associate vitamin E intake with cancer incidence have found that vitamin E is not beneficial in most cases.

Both the HOPE-TOO Trial and Women's Health Study evaluated whether vitamin E supplements might protect people from cancer. HOPE-TOO, which followed men and women ≥55 years of age with heart disease or diabetes for 7 years, found no significant differences in the number of new cancers or cancer deaths between individuals randomly assigned to take 400 IU/day of natural vitamin E (268 mg) or a placebo [22]. In the Women's Health Study, in which healthy women ≥45 years of age received either 600 IU of natural vitamin E (402 mg) every other day or a placebo for 10 years, the supplement did not reduce the risk of developing any form of cancer [25].

Several studies have examined whether vitamin E intake and/or supplemental vitamin E affects the risk of developing prostate cancer. A prospective cohort study of >29,000 men found no association between dietary or supplemental vitamin E intake and prostate cancer risk [29]. However, among current smokers and men who had quit, vitamin E intakes of more than 400 IU/day (form not specified) were associated with a statistically significant 71% reduction in the risk of advanced prostate cancer. In a clinical trial involving 29,133 male smokers, men randomly assigned to take daily supplements of 111 IU of synthetic vitamin E (50 mg, as dl-alpha-tocopheryl acetate) for 5–8 years had 32% fewer prostate cancers compared to subjects who did not take the supplements [30]. Based in part on the promising results of this study, a large randomized clinical trial, called the SELECT trial, began in 2001 to determine whether 7–12 years of daily supplementation with 400 IU of synthetic vitamin E (180 mg, as dl-alpha-tocopheryl acetate), with or without selenium (200 mcg, as L-selenomethionine), reduced the number of new prostate cancers in 35,533 healthy men age 50 and older. The trial was discontinued in October 2008 when an analysis found that the supplements, taken alone or together for about 5.5 years, did not prevent prostate cancer [31]. Results from an additional 1.5 years of follow-up from this trial (during which the subjects no longer received vitamin E or selenium), showed that the men who had taken the vitamin E had a 17% increased risk of prostate cancer compared to men only taking placebos, a statistically significant difference [32]. The risk of developing prostate cancer was also slightly increased in subjects taking vitamin E plus selenium or selenium alone, but the differences were not statistically significant. No differences were found among groups in the incidence of lung or colorectal cancers or all cancers combined. Study staff members will continue to monitor participants' health for up to 5 more years. The National Cancer Institute website provides additional information on the SELECT trial.

One study of women in Iowa provides evidence that higher intakes of vitamin E from foods and supplements could decrease the risk of colon cancer, especially in women <65 years of age [33]. The overall relative risk for the highest quintile of intake (>35.7 IU/day, form not specified) compared to the lowest quintile (<5.7 IU/day, form not specified) was 0.32. However, prospective cohort studies of 87,998 women in the Nurses' Health Study and 47,344 men in the Health Professionals Follow-up Study failed to replicate these results [34]. Although some research links higher intakes of vitamin E with decreased incidence of breast cancer, an examination of the impact of dietary factors, including vitamin E, on the incidence of postmenopausal breast cancer in >18,000 women found no benefit from the vitamin [35].

The American Cancer Society conducted an epidemiologic study examining the association between use of vitamin C and vitamin E supplements and bladder cancer mortality. Of the almost one million adults followed between 1982 and 1998, adults who took supplemental vitamin E for 10 years or longer had a reduced risk of death from bladder cancer [36]; vitamin C supplementation provided no protection.

Evidence to date is insufficient to support taking vitamin E to prevent cancer. In fact, daily use of large-dose vitamin E supplements (400 IU of synthetic vitamin E [180 mg]) may increase the risk of prostate cancer.
Eye disorders

Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) and cataracts are among the most common causes of significant vision loss in older people. Their etiologies are usually unknown, but the cumulative effects of oxidative stress have been postulated to play a role. If so, nutrients with antioxidant functions, such as vitamin E, could be used to prevent or treat these conditions.

Prospective cohort studies have found that people with relatively high dietary intakes of vitamin E (e.g., 20 mg/day [30 IU]) have an approximately 20% lower risk of developing AMD than people with low intakes (e.g., <10 mg/day [<15 IU]) [37,38]. However, two randomized controlled trials in which participants took supplements of vitamin E (500 IU/day [335 mg] d-alpha-tocopherol in one study [39] and 111 IU/day (50 mg) dl-alpha-tocopheryl acetate combined with 20 mg/day beta-carotene in the other [40]) or a placebo failed to show a protective effect for vitamin E on AMD. The Age-Related Eye Disease Study (AREDS), a large randomized clinical trial, found that participants at high risk of developing advanced AMD (i.e., those with intermediate AMD or those with advanced AMD in one eye) reduced their risk of developing advanced AMD by 25% by taking a daily supplement containing vitamin E (400 IU [180 mg] dl-alpha-tocopheryl acetate), beta-carotene (15 mg), vitamin C (500 mg), zinc (80 mg), and copper (2 mg) compared to participants taking a placebo over 5 years [41]. A follow-up AREDS2 study confirmed the value of this and similar supplement formulations in reducing the progression of AMD over a median follow-up period of 5 years [42].

Several observational studies have revealed a potential relationship between vitamin E supplements and the risk of cataract formation. One prospective cohort study found that lens clarity was superior in participants who took vitamin E supplements and those with higher blood levels of the vitamin [43]. In another study, long-term use of vitamin E supplements was associated with slower progression of age-related lens opacification [44]. However, in the AREDS trial, the use of a vitamin E-containing (as dl-alpha-tocopheryl acetate) formulation had no apparent effect on the development or progression of cataracts over an average of 6.3 years [45]. The AREDS2 study, which also tested formulations containing 400 IU (180 mg) vitamin E, confirmed these findings [46].

Overall, the available evidence is inconsistent with respect to whether vitamin E supplements, taken alone or in combination with other antioxidants, can reduce the risk of developing AMD or cataracts. However, the formulations of vitamin E, other antioxidants, zinc, and copper used in AREDS hold promise for slowing the progression of AMD in people at high risk of developing advanced AMD.
Cognitive decline

The brain has a high oxygen consumption rate and abundant polyunsaturated fatty acids in the neuronal cell membranes. Researchers hypothesize that if cumulative free-radical damage to neurons over time contributes to cognitive decline and neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer's disease, then ingestion of sufficient or supplemental antioxidants (such as vitamin E) might provide some protection [47]. This hypothesis was supported by the results of a clinical trial in 341 patients with Alzheimer's disease of moderate severity who were randomly assigned to receive a placebo, vitamin E (2,000 IU/day dl-alpha-tocopherol), a monoamine oxidase inhibitor (selegiline), or vitamin E and selegiline [47]. Over 2 years, treatment with vitamin E and selegiline, separately or together, significantly delayed functional deterioration and the need for institutionalization compared to placebo. However, participants taking vitamin E experienced significantly more falls.

Vitamin E consumption from foods or supplements was associated with less cognitive decline over 3 years in a prospective cohort study of elderly, free-living individuals age 65–102 years [48]. However, a clinical trial in primarily healthy older women who were randomly assigned to receive 600 IU (402 mg) d-alpha-tocopherol every other day or a placebo for ≤4 years found that the supplements provided no apparent cognitive benefits [49]. Another trial in which 769 men and women with mild cognitive impairment were randomly assigned to receive 2,000 IU/day vitamin E (form not specified), a cholinesterase inhibitor (donepezil), or placebo found no significant differences in the progression rate of Alzheimer's disease between the vitamin E and placebo groups [50]

In summary, most research results do not support the use of vitamin E supplements by healthy or mildly impaired individuals to maintain cognitive performance or slow its decline with normal aging [51]. More research is needed to identify the role of vitamin E, if any, in the management of cognitive impairment [52].
Health Risks from Excessive Vitamin E

Research has not found any adverse effects from consuming vitamin E in food [6]. However, high doses of alpha-tocopherol supplements can cause hemorrhage and interrupt blood coagulation in animals, and in vitro data suggest that high doses inhibit platelet aggregation. Two clinical trials have found an increased risk of hemorrhagic stroke in participants taking alpha-tocopherol; one trial included Finnish male smokers who consumed 50 mg/day for an average of 6 years [53] and the other trial involved a large group of male physicians in the United States who consumed 400 IU (180 mg) of synthetic vitamin E every other day for 8 years [26]. Because the majority of physicians in the latter study were also taking aspirin, this finding could indicate that vitamin E has a tendency to cause bleeding.

The FNB has established ULs for vitamin E based on the potential for hemorrhagic effects (see Table 3). The ULs apply to all forms of supplemental alpha-tocopherol, including the eight stereoisomers present in synthetic vitamin E. Doses of up to 1,000 mg/day (1,500 IU/day of the natural form or 1,100 IU/day of the synthetic form) in adults appear to be safe, although the data are limited and based on small groups of people taking up to 3,200 mg/day of alpha-tocopherol for only a few weeks or months. Long-term intakes above the UL increase the risk of adverse health effects [6]. Vitamin E ULs for infants have not been established.
Table 3: Tolerable Upper Intake Levels (ULs) for Vitamin E [6] Age 	Male 	Female 	Pregnancy 	Lactation
1–3 years 	200 mg 	200 mg 		
4–8 years 	300 mg 	300 mg 			
9–13 years 	600 mg 	600 mg 		
14–18 years 	800 mg 	800 mg 	800 mg 	800 mg
19+ years 	1,000 mg 	1,000 mg 	1,000 mg 	1,000 mg

Two meta-analyses of randomized trials have also raised questions about the safety of large doses of vitamin E, including doses lower than the UL. These meta-analyses linked supplementation to small but statistically significant increases in all-cause mortality. One analysis found an increased risk of death at doses of 400 IU/day (form not specified), although the risk began to increase at 150 IU [54]. In the other analysis of studies of antioxidant supplements for disease prevention, the highest quality trials revealed that vitamin E, administered singly (dose range 10 IU–5,000 IU/day; mean 569 IU [form not specified]) or combined with up to four other antioxidants, significantly increased mortality risk [55].

The implications of these analyses for the potential adverse effects of high-dose vitamin E supplements are unclear [56-59]. Participants in the studies included in these analyses were typically middle-aged or older and had chronic diseases or related risk factors. These participants often consumed other supplements in addition to vitamin E. Some of the studies analyzed took place in developing countries in which nutritional deficiencies are common. A review of the subset of studies in which vitamin E supplements were given to healthy individuals for the primary prevention of chronic disease found no convincing evidence that the supplements increased mortality [60].

However, results from the recently published, large SELECT trial show that vitamin E supplements (400 IU/day [180 mg] as dl-alpha-tocopheryl acetate) may harm adult men in the general population by increasing their risk of prostate cancer [32]. Follow-up studies are assessing whether the cancer risk was associated with baseline blood levels of vitamin E and selenium prior to supplementation as well as whether changes in one or more genes might increase a man's risk of developing prostate cancer while taking vitamin E.
Interactions with Medications

Vitamin E supplements have the potential to interact with several types of medications. A few examples are provided below. People taking these and other medications on a regular basis should discuss their vitamin E intakes with their health care providers.
Anticoagulant and antiplatelet medications

Vitamin E can inhibit platelet aggregation and antagonize vitamin K-dependent clotting factors. As a result, taking large doses with anticoagulant or antiplatelet medications, such as warfarin (Coumadin), can increase the risk of bleeding, especially in conjunction with low vitamin K intake. The amounts of supplemental vitamin E needed to produce clinically significant effects are unknown but probably exceed 400 IU/day [61].
Simvastatin and niacin

Some people take vitamin E supplements with other antioxidants, such as vitamin C, selenium, and beta-carotene. This collection of antioxidant ingredients blunted the rise in high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol levels, especially levels of HDL2, the most cardioprotective HDL component, among people treated with a combination of simvastatin (brand name Zocor) and niacin [62,63].
Chemotherapy and radiotherapy

Oncologists generally advise against the use of antioxidant supplements during cancer chemotherapy or radiotherapy because they might reduce the effectiveness of these therapies by inhibiting cellular oxidative damage in cancerous cells [64,65]. Although a systematic review of randomized controlled trials has called this concern into question [66], further research is needed to evaluate the potential risks and benefits of concurrent antioxidant supplementation with conventional therapies for cancer.
Vitamin E and Healthful Diets

The federal government's 2020–2025 Dietary Guidelines for Americans notes that "Because foods provide an array of nutrients and other components that have benefits for health, nutritional needs should be met primarily through foods. ... In some cases, fortified foods and dietary supplements are useful when it is not possible otherwise to meet needs for one or more nutrients (e.g., during specific life stages such as pregnancy)."

For more information about building a healthy dietary pattern, refer to the Dietary Guidelines for Americans and the USDA's MyPlate.

The Dietary Guidelines for Americans describes a healthy dietary pattern as one that

    Includes a variety of vegetables; fruits; grains (at least half whole grains); fat-free and low-fat milk, yogurt, and cheese; and oils.
        ​​​​​​​Vitamin E is found in green leafy vegetables, whole grains, fortified cereals, and vegetable oils.
    Includes a variety of protein foods such as lean meats; poultry; eggs; seafood; beans, peas, and lentils; nuts and seeds; and soy products.
        ​​​​​​​Nuts are good sources of vitamin E.
    Limits foods and beverages higher in added sugars, saturated fat, and sodium.
    Limits alcoholic beverages.
    Stays within your daily calorie needs.

References

    Traber MG. Vitamin E. In: Shils ME, Shike M, Ross AC, Caballero B, Cousins R, eds. Modern Nutrition in Health and Disease. 10th ed. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2006;396-411.
    Traber MG. Vitamin E regulatory mechanisms. Annu Rev Nutr 2007;27:347-62. [PubMed abstract]
    Sen CK, Khanna S, Roy S. Tocotrienols: vitamin E beyond tocopherols. Life Sci 2006;78:2088-98. [PubMed abstract]
    Dietrich M, Traber MG, Jacques PF, Cross CE, Hu Y, Block G. Does γ-tocopherol play a role in the primary prevention of heart disease and cancer? A review. Am J Coll Nutr 2006;25:292-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Verhagen H, Buijsse B, Jansen E, Bueno-de-Mesquita B. The state of antioxidant affairs. Nutr Today 2006;41:244-50.
    Institute of Medicine. Food and Nutrition Board. Dietary Reference Intakes: Vitamin C, Vitamin E, Selenium, and Carotenoids. Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 2000.
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Food Labeling: Revision of the Nutrition and Supplement Facts Labels. 2016.
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Food Labeling: Revision of the Nutrition and Supplement Facts Labels and Serving Sizes of Foods That Can Reasonably Be Consumed at One Eating Occasion; Dual-Column Labeling; Updating, Modifying, and Establishing Certain Reference Amounts Customarily Consumed; Serving Size for Breath Mints; and Technical Amendments; Proposed Extension of Compliance Dates. 2017.
    U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service. FoodData Central, 2019.
    Gao X, Wilde PE, Lichtenstein AH, Bermudez OI, Tucker KL. The maximal amount of dietary á-tocopherol intake in U.S. adults (NHANES 2001-2002). J Nutr 2006;136:1021-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Interagency Board for Nutrition Monitoring and Related Research. Third Report on Nutrition Monitoring in the United States. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1995.
    Ford ES, Ajani UA, Mokdad AH. Brief communication: the prevalence of high intake of vitamin E from the use of supplements among U.S. adults. Ann Intern Med 2005;143:116-20. [PubMed abstract]
    Brion LP, Bell EF, Raghuveer TS. Vitamin E supplementation for prevention of morbidity and mortality in preterm infants. Cochrane Database Syst Rev;4:CD003665. [PubMed abstract]
    Kowdley KV, Mason JB, Meydani SN, Cornwall S, Grand RJ. Vitamin E deficiency and impaired cellular immunity related to intestinal fat malabsorption. Gastroenterology 1992;102:2139-42. [PubMed abstract]
    Tanyel MC, Mancano LD. Neurologic findings in vitamin E deficiency. Am Fam Physician 1997;55:197-201. [PubMed abstract]
    Cavalier L, Ouahchi K, Kayden H, Donato S, Reutenaucer L, Mandel JL, et al. Ataxia with isolated vitamin E deficiency: heterogeneity of mutations and phenotypic variability in a large number of families. Am J Hum Genet 1998;62:301-10. [PubMed abstract]
    Glynn RJ, Ridker PM, Goldhaber SZ, Zee RY, Buring JE. Effects of random allocation to vitamin E supplementation on the occurrence of venous thromboembolism: report from the Women's Health Study. Circulation 2007;116:1497-1503. [PubMed abstract]
    Stampfer MJ, Hennekens CH, Manson JE, Colditz GA, Rosner B, Willett WC. Vitamin E consumption and the risk of coronary disease in women. N Engl J Med 1993;328:1444-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Knekt P, Reunanen A, Jarvinen R, Seppanen R, Heliovaara M, Aromaa A. Antioxidant vitamin intake and coronary mortality in a longitudinal population study. Am J Epidemiol 1994;139:1180-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Traber MG. Heart disease and single-vitamin supplementation. Am J Clin Nutr 2007;85:293S-9S. [PubMed abstract]
    Jialal I, Devaraj S. Vitamin E supplementation and cardiovascular events in high-risk patients. N Engl J Med 2000;342:154-60. [PubMed abstract]
    Lonn E, Bosch J, Yusuf S, Sheridan P, Pogue J, Arnold JM, et al.; HOPE and HOPE-TOO Trial Investigators. Effects of long-term vitamin E supplementation on cardiovascular events and cancer: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2005;293:1338-47. [PubMed abstract]
    Brown BG, Crowley J. Is there any hope for vitamin E? JAMA 2005;293:1387-90. [PubMed abstract]
    Waters DD, Alderman EL, Hsia J, Howard BV, Cobb FR, Rogers WJ, et al. Effects of hormone replacement therapy and antioxidant vitamin supplements on coronary atherosclerosis in postmenopausal women: a randomized controlled trial. J Am Med Assoc 2002;288:2432-40. [PubMed abstract]
    Lee I-M, Cook NR, Gaziano JM, Gordon D, Ridker PM, Manson JE, et al. Vitamin E in the primary prevention of cardiovascular disease and cancer: the Women's Health Study: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2005;294:56-65. [PubMed abstract]
    Sesso HD, Buring JE, Christen WG, Kurth T, Belanger C, MacFadyen J, et al. Vitamins E and C in the prevention of cardiovascular disease in men: the Physicians' Health Study II randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2008;300:2123-33. [PubMed abstract]
    Blumberg JB, Frei B. Why clinical trials of vitamin E and cardiovascular diseases may be fatally flawed. Commentary on "The relationship between dose of vitamin E and suppression of oxidative stress in humans." Free Radic Biol Med 2007;43:1374-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Weitberg AB, Corvese D. Effect of vitamin E and beta-carotene on DNA strand breakage induced by tobacco-specific nitrosamines and stimulated human phagocytes. J Exp Clin Cancer Res 1997;16:11-4. [PubMed abstract]
    Kirsh VA, Hayes RB, Mayne ST, Chatterjee N, Subar AF, Dixon LB, et al. Supplemental and dietary vitamin E, β-carotene, and vitamin C intakes and prostate cancer risk. J Natl Cancer Inst 2006;98:245-54. [PubMed abstract]
    Heinonen OP, Albanes D, Virtamo J, Taylor PR, Huttunen JK, Hartman AM, Haapakoski J, Malila N, Rautalahti M, Ripatti S, Mäenpää H, Teerenhovi L, Koss L, Virolainen M, Edwards BK. Prostate cancer and supplementation with alpha-tocopherol and beta-carotene: incidence and mortality in a controlled trial. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1998 Mar 18;90(6):440-6. [PubMed abstract]
    National Cancer Institute. Questions and Answers: Selenium and Vitamin E Cancer Prevention Trial (SELECT).
    Klein EA, Thompson Jr. IM, Tangen CM, Crowley JJ, Lucia MS, Goodman PJ, et al. Vitamin E and the risk of prostate cancer: the Selenium and Vitamin E Cancer Prevention Trial (SELECT). JAMA 2011;306:1549-1556. [PubMed abstract]
    Bostick RM, Potter JD, McKenzie DR, Sellers TA, Kushi LH, Steinmetz KA, et al. Reduced risk of colon cancer with high intakes of vitamin E: the Iowa Women's Health Study. Cancer Res 1993;15:4230-17. [PubMed abstract]
    Wu K, Willett WC, Chan JM, Fuchs CS, Colditz GA, Rimm EB, et al. A prospective study on supplemental vitamin E intake and risk of colon cancer in women and men. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2002;11:1298-304. [PubMed abstract]
    Graham S, Sielezny M, Marshall J, Priore R, Freudenheim J, Brasure J, et al. Diet in the epidemiology of postmenopausal breast cancer in the New York State Cohort. Am J Epidemiol 1992;136:3127-37. [PubMed abstract]
    Jacobs EJ, Henion AK, Briggs PJ, Connell CJ, McCullough ML, Jonas CR, et al. Vitamin C and vitamin E supplement use and bladder cancer mortality in a large cohort of US men and women. Am J Epidemiol 2002;156:1002-10. [PubMed abstract]
    Chong EW-T, Wong TY, Kreis AJ, Simpson JA, Guymer RH. Dietary antioxidants and primary prevention of age-related macular degeneration: systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ 2007;335:755. [PubMed abstract]
    Evans J. Primary prevention of age related macular degeneration. BMJ 2007;335:729. [PubMed abstract]
    Taylor HR, Tikellis G, Robman LD, McCarty CA, McNeil JJ. Vitamin E supplementation and macular degeneration: randomized controlled trial. BMJ 2002;325:11. [PubMed abstract]
    Teikari JM, Virtamo J, Rautalahti M, Palmgren J, Liesto K, Heinonen OP. Long-term supplementation with alpha-tocopherol and beta-carotene and age-related cataract. Acta Ophthalmol Scand 1997;75:634-40. [PubMed abstract]
    Age-Related Eye Disease Study Research Group. A randomized, placebo-controlled, clinical trial of high-dose supplementation with vitamins C and E, beta carotene, and zinc for age-related macular degeneration and vision loss: AREDS report no. 8. Arch Ophthalmol 2001;119:1417-36. [PubMed abstract]
    The Age-Related Eye Disease Study 2 (AREDS2) Research Group. Lutein + zeaxanthin and omega-3 fatty acids for age-related macular degeneration: the Age-Related Eye Disease Study 2 (AREDS2) randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2013;309:2005-15. [PubMed abstract]
    Leske MC, Chylack LT Jr, He Q, Wu SY, Schoenfeld E, Friend J, et al. Antioxidant vitamins and nuclear opacities: the longitudinal study of cataract. Ophthalmology 1998;105:831-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Jacques PF, Taylor A, Moeller S, Hankinson SE, Rogers G, Tung W, et al. Long-term nutrient intake and 5-year change in nuclear lens opacities. Arch Ophthalmol 2005;123:517-26. [PubMed abstract]
    Age-Related Eye Disease Study Research Group. A randomized, placebo-controlled, clinical trial of high-dose supplementation with vitamins C and E and beta carotene for age-related cataract and vision loss: AREDS report no. 9. Arch Opthalmol 2001;119:1439-52. [PubMed abstract]
    The Age-Related Eye Disease Study 2 (AREDS2) Research Group. Lutein/zeaxanthin for the treatment of age-related cataract: AREDS2 randomized trial report no. 4. JAMA Ophthalmol 2013. Online May 5. [PubMed abstract]
    Sano M, Ernesto C, Thomas RG, Klauber MR, Schafer K, Grundman M, et al. A controlled trial of selegiline, alpha-tocopherol, or both as treatment for Alzehimer’s disease. N Engl J Med 1997;336:1216-22. [PubMed abstract]
    Morris MC, Evand DA, Bienias JL, Tangney CC, Wilson RS. Vitamin E and cognitive decline in older persons. Arch Neurol 2002;59:1125-32. [PubMed abstract]
    Kang JH, Cook N, Manson J, Buring J, Grodstein F. A randomized trial of vitamin E supplementation and cognitive function in women. Arch Intern Med 2006;166:2462-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Petersen RC, Thomas RG, Grundman M, Bennett D, Doody R, Ferris S, et al. Vitamin E and donepezil for the treatment of mild cognitive impairment. N Engl J Med 2005;352:2379-88. [PubMed abstract]
    Espeland MA. Preventing cognitive decline in usual aging. Arch Intern Med 2006;166:2433-4. [PubMed abstract]
    Isaac MGEKN, Quinn R, Tabet N. Vitamin E for Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment (review). Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2008;(3):CD002854. [PubMed abstract]
    Alpha-Tocopherol, Beta Carotene Cancer Prevention Study Group. The effect of vitamin E and beta carotene on the incidence of lung cancer and other cancers in male smokers. N Engl J Med 1994;330:1029-35. [PubMed abstract]
    Miller ER 3rd, Pastor-Barriuso R, Dalal D, Riemersma RA, Appel LJ, Guallar E. Meta-analysis: high-dosage vitamin E supplementation may increase all-cause mortality. Ann Intern Med 2005;142:37-46. [PubMed abstract]
    Bjelakovic G, Nikolova D, Gluud LL, Simonetti RG, Gluud C. Mortality in randomized trials of antioxidant supplements for primary and secondary prevention: systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA 2007;297:842-57. [PubMed abstract]
    Comments and responses: high dosage vitamin E supplementation and all-cause mortality. Ann Intern Med 2005;143:150-7.
    Greenberg ER. Vitamin E supplements: good in theory, but is the theory good? Ann Intern Med 2005;142:75-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Hathcock JN, Azzi A, Blumberg J, Bray T, Dickinson A, Frei B, et al. Vitamins E and C are safe across a broad range of intakes. Am J Clin Nutr 2005;81:367-45. [PubMed abstract]
    Various authors. Letters: antioxidant supplements and mortality. JAMA 2007;298:400-3.
    Huang HY, Caballero B, Chang S, Alberg A, Semba R, Schneyer C, et al. Multivitamin/Mineral Supplements and Prevention of Chronic Disease. Evidence Report/Technology Assessment No. 139. (Prepared by The Johns Hopkins University Evidence-based Practice Center under Contract No. 290-02-0018). AHRQ Publication No. 06-E012. Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. May 2008.
    Natural Medicines Comprehensive Database. Vitamin E.
    Brown BG, Zhao X-Q, Chait A, Fisher LD, Cheung MC, Morse JS, et al. Simvastatin and niacin, antioxidant vitamins, or the combination for the prevention of coronary disease. N Engl J Med 2001;345:1583-92. [PubMed abstract]
    Cheung MC, Zhao X-Q, Chait A, Albers JJ, Brown BG. Antioxidant supplements block the response of HDL to simvastatin-niacin therapy in patients with coronary artery disease and low HDL. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 2001;21:1320-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Doyle C, Kushi LH, Byers T, Courneya KS, Demark-Wahnefried W, Grant B, et al., for the 2006 Nutrition, Physical Activity and Cancer Survivorship Advisory Committee. Nutrition and physical activity during and after cancer treatment: an American Cancer Society guide for informed choices. CA Cancer J Clin 2006;56:323-53. [PubMed abstract]
    Lawenda BD, Kelly KM, Ladas EJ, Sagar SM, Vickers A, Blumberg JB. Should supplemental antioxidant administration be avoided during chemotherapy and radiation therapy? J Natl Cancer Inst 2008;100:773-83. [PubMed abstract]
    Block KI, Koch AC, Mead MN, Tothy PK, Newman RA, Gyllenhaal C. Impact of antioxidant supplementation on chemotherapeutic efficacy: a systematic review of the evidence from randomized controlled trials. Cancer Treat Rev 2007;33:407-18. [PubMed abstract]

Disclaimer

This fact sheet by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Office of Dietary Supplements (ODS) provides information that should not take the place of medical advice. We encourage you to talk to your health care providers (doctor, registered dietitian, pharmacist, etc.) about your interest in, questions about, or use of dietary supplements and what may be best for your overall health. Any mention in this publication of a specific product or service, or recommendation from an organization or professional society, does not represent an endorsement by ODS of that product, service, or expert advice.

Updated: March 26, 2021


 Vitamin K: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals (original version)
Vitamin K: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals
Table of Contents

    Introduction
    Recommended Intakes
    Sources of Vitamin K
    Vitamin K Intakes and Status
    Vitamin K Deficiency
    Groups at Risk of Vitamin K Inadequacy
    Vitamin K and Health
    Health Risks from Excessive Vitamin K
    Interactions with Medications
    Vitamin K and Healthful Diets
    References
    Disclaimer

Introduction

Vitamin K, the generic name for a family of compounds with a common chemical structure of 2-methyl-1,4-naphthoquinone, is a fat-soluble vitamin that is naturally present in some foods and is available as a dietary supplement [1]. These compounds include phylloquinone (vitamin K1) and a series of menaquinones (vitamin K2) [2]. Menaquinones have unsaturated isoprenyl side chains and are designated as MK-4 through MK-13, based on the length of their side chain [1,2]. MK-4, MK-7, and MK-9 are the most well-studied menaquinones.

Phylloquinone is present primarily in green leafy vegetables and is the main dietary form of vitamin K [3]. Menaquinones, which are predominantly of bacterial origin, are present in modest amounts in various animal-based and fermented foods [1,4]. Almost all menaquinones, in particular the long-chain menaquinones, are also produced by bacteria in the human gut [5,6]. MK-4 is unique in that it is produced by the body from phylloquinone via a conversion process that does not involve bacterial action [7].

Vitamin K functions as a coenzyme for vitamin K-dependent carboxylase, an enzyme required for the synthesis of proteins involved in hemostasis (blood clotting) and bone metabolism and other diverse physiological functions [3,5]. Prothrombin (clotting factor II) is a vitamin K-dependent protein in plasma that is directly involved in blood clotting. Warfarin (Coumadin) and some anticoagulants used primarily in Europe antagonize the activity of vitamin K and, in turn, prothrombin [8]. For this reason, individuals who are taking these anticoagulants need to maintain consistent vitamin K intakes.

Matrix Gla-protein (MGP), a vitamin K-dependent protein present in vascular smooth muscle, bone, and cartilage, is the focus of considerable scientific research because it might help reduce abnormal calcification [9]. Osteocalcin is another vitamin K-dependent protein that is present in bone and may be involved in bone mineralization or turnover [5].

Like dietary lipids and other fat-soluble vitamins, ingested vitamin K is incorporated into mixed micelles via the action of bile and pancreatic enzymes, and it is absorbed by enterocytes of the small intestine [10]. From there, vitamin K is incorporated into chylomicrons, secreted into the lymphatic capillaries, transported to the liver, and repackaged into very low-density lipoproteins [2,10]. Vitamin K is present in the liver and other body tissues, including the brain, heart, pancreas, and bone [2,3,11].

In the circulation, vitamin K is carried mainly in lipoproteins [2]. Compared to the other fat-soluble vitamins, very small amounts of vitamin K circulate in the blood. Vitamin K is rapidly metabolized and excreted. Based on phylloquinone measurements, the body retains only about 30% to 40% of an oral physiological dose, while about 20% is excreted in the urine and 40% to 50% in the feces via bile [2,11]. This rapid metabolism accounts for vitamin K's relatively low blood levels and tissue stores compared to those of the other fat-soluble vitamins [11].

Little is known about the absorption and transport of vitamin K produced by gut bacteria, but research indicates that substantial quantities of long-chain menaquinones are present in the large bowel [7]. Although the amount of vitamin K that the body obtains in this manner is unclear, experts believe that these menaquinones satisfy at least some of the body's requirement for vitamin K [6,7].

In most cases, vitamin K status is not routinely assessed, except in individuals who take anticoagulants or have bleeding disorders. The only clinically significant indicator of vitamin K status is prothrombin time (the time it takes for blood to clot), and ordinary changes in vitamin K intakes have rarely been shown to alter prothrombin time [5]. In healthy people, fasting concentrations of phylloquinone in plasma have been reported to range from 0.29 to 2.64 nmol/L [12]. However, it is not clear whether this measure can be used to quantitatively assess vitamin K status. People with plasma phylloquinone concentrations slightly below the normal range have no clinical indications of vitamin K deficiency, possibly because plasma phylloquinone concentrations do not measure the contribution of menaquinones from the diet and the large bowel [12]. No data on normal ranges of menaquinones are available [2].
Recommended Intakes

Intake recommendations for vitamin K and other nutrients are provided in the Dietary Reference Intakes (DRIs) developed by the Food and Nutrition Board (FNB) at the Institute of Medicine of the National Academies [3]. DRI is the general term for a set of reference values used for planning and assessing nutrient intakes of healthy people. These values, which vary by age and gender, include the following:

    Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA): Average daily level of intake sufficient to meet the nutrient requirements of nearly all (97%–98%) healthy individuals; often used to plan nutritionally adequate diets for individuals
    Adequate Intake (AI): Intake at this level is assumed to ensure nutritional adequacy; established when evidence is insufficient to develop an RDA
    Estimated Average Requirement (EAR): Average daily level of intake estimated to meet the requirements of 50% of healthy individuals; usually used to assess the nutrient intakes of groups of people and to plan nutritionally adequate diets for them; can also be used to assess the nutrient intakes of individuals
    Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL): Maximum daily intake unlikely to cause adverse health effects

Insufficient data were available to establish an EAR for vitamin K, so the FNB established AIs for all ages that are based on vitamin K intakes in healthy population groups [3]. Table 1 lists the current AIs for vitamin K in micrograms (mcg). The AIs for infants are based on the calculated mean vitamin K intake of healthy breastfed infants and the assumption that infants receive prophylactic vitamin K at birth as recommended by American and Canadian pediatric societies [3].
Table 1: Adequate Intakes (AIs) for Vitamin K [3] Age 	Male 	Female 	Pregnancy 	Lactation
Birth to 6 months 	2.0 mcg 	2.0 mcg 		
7–12 months 	2.5 mcg 	2.5 mcg 		
1–3 years 	30 mcg 	30 mcg 		
4–8 years 	55 mcg 	55 mcg 		
9–13 years 	60 mcg 	60 mcg 		
14–18 years 	75 mcg 	75 mcg 	75 mcg 	75 mcg
19+ years 	120 mcg 	90 mcg 	90 mcg 	90 mcg
 
Sources of Vitamin K
Food

Food sources of phylloquinone include vegetables, especially green leafy vegetables, vegetable oils, and some fruits. Meat, dairy foods, and eggs contain low levels of phylloquinone but modest amounts of menaquinones [4]. Natto (a traditional Japanese food made from fermented soybeans) has high amounts of menaquinones [1,13]. Other fermented foods, such as cheese, also contain menaquinones. However, the forms and amounts of vitamin K in these foods likely vary depending on the bacterial strains used to make the foods and their fermentation conditions [14]. Animals synthesize MK-4 from menadione (a synthetic form of vitamin K that can be used in poultry and swine feed) [15]. Thus, poultry and pork products contain MK-4 if menadione is added to the animal feed [1,4,14].

The most common sources of vitamin K in the U.S. diet are spinach; broccoli; iceberg lettuce; and fats and oils, particularly soybean and canola oil [5,7]. Few foods are fortified with vitamin K [5]; breakfast cereals are not typically fortified with vitamin K, although some meal replacement shakes and bars are.

Data on the bioavailability of different forms of vitamin K from food are very limited [1]. The absorption rate of phylloquinone in its free form is approximately 80%, but its absorption rate from foods is significantly lower [2]. Phylloquinone in plant foods is tightly bound to chloroplasts, so it is less bioavailable than that from oils or dietary supplements [1]. For example, the body absorbs only 4% to 17% as much phylloquinone from spinach as from a tablet [2]. Consuming vegetables at the same time as some fat improves phylloquinone absorption from the vegetables, but the amount absorbed is still lower than that from oils. Limited research suggests that long-chain MKs may have higher absorption rates than phylloquinone from green vegetables [7].

Several food sources of vitamin K are listed in Table 2. All values in this table are for phylloquinone content, except when otherwise indicated, because food composition data for menaquinones are limited [1].
Table 2: Vitamin K (Phylloquinone, Except as Indicated) Content of Selected Foods [4,13,16] Food 	Micrograms
(mcg) per
serving 	Percent
DV*
Natto, 3 ounces (as MK-7) 	850 	708
Collards, frozen, boiled, ½ cup 	530 	442
Turnip greens, frozen, boiled ½ cup 	426 	355
Spinach, raw, 1 cup 	145 	121
Kale, raw, 1 cup 	113 	94
Broccoli, chopped, boiled, ½ cup 	110 	92
Soybeans, roasted, ½ cup 	43 	36
Carrot juice, ¾ cup 	28 	23
Soybean oil, 1 tablespoon 	25 	21
Edamame, frozen, prepared, ½ cup 	21 	18
Pumpkin, canned, ½ cup 	20 	17
Pomegranate juice, ¾ cup 	19 	16
Okra, raw, ½ cup 	16 	13
Salad dressing, Caesar, 1 tablespoon 	15 	13
Pine nuts, dried, 1 ounce 	15 	13
Blueberries, raw, ½ cup 	14 	12
Iceberg lettuce, raw, 1 cup 	14 	12
Chicken, breast, rotisserie, 3 ounces (as MK-4) 	13 	11
Grapes, ½ cup 	11 	9
Vegetable juice cocktail, ¾ cup 	10 	8
Canola oil, 1 tablespoon 	10 	8
Cashews, dry roasted, 1 ounce 	10 	8
Carrots, raw, 1 medium 	8 	7
Olive oil, 1 tablespoon 	8 	7
Ground beef, broiled, 3 ounces (as MK-4) 	6 	5
Figs, dried, ¼ cup 	6 	5
Chicken liver, braised, 3 ounces (as MK-4) 	6 	5
Ham, roasted or pan broiled, 3 ounces (as MK-4) 	4 	3
Cheddar cheese, 1½ ounces (as MK-4) 	4 	3
Mixed nuts, dry roasted, 1 ounce 	4 	3
Egg, hard boiled, 1 large (as MK-4) 	4 	3
Mozzarella cheese, 1½ ounces (as MK-4) 	2 	2
Milk, 2%, 1 cup (as MK-4) 	1 	1
Salmon, sockeye, cooked, 3 ounces (as MK-4) 	0.3 	0
Shrimp, cooked, 3 ounces (as MK-4) 	0.3 	0

*DV = Daily Value. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) developed DVs to help consumers compare the nutrient contents of foods and dietary supplements within the context of a total diet. The DV for vitamin K is 120 mcg for adults and children age 4 years and older [17]. FDA does not require food labels to list vitamin K content unless vitamin K has been added to the food. Foods providing 20% or more of the DV are considered to be high sources of a nutrient, but foods providing lower percentages of the DV also contribute to a healthful diet.

The U.S. Department of Agriculture's (USDA's) FoodData Central [16] lists the nutrient content of many foods and provides comprehensive lists of foods containing vitamin K (phylloquinone) arranged by nutrient content and by food name and of foods containing vitamin K (MK-4) arranged by nutrient content and food name.
Dietary supplements

Vitamin K is present in most multivitamin/mineral supplements, typically at values less than 75% of the DV [18]. It is also available in dietary supplements containing only vitamin K or vitamin K combined with a few other nutrients, frequently calcium, magnesium, and/or vitamin D. These supplements tend to have a wider range of vitamin K doses than multivitamin/mineral supplements, with some providing 4,050 mcg (5,063% of the DV) or another very high amount [18].

Several forms of vitamin K are used in dietary supplements, including vitamin K1 as phylloquinone or phytonadione (a synthetic form of vitamin K1) and vitamin K2 as MK-4 or MK-7 [18]. Few data are available on the relative bioavailability of the various forms of vitamin K supplements. One study found that both phytonadione and MK-7 supplements are well absorbed, but MK-7 has a longer half-life [19].

Menadione, which is sometimes called vitamin K3, is another synthetic form of vitamin K. It was shown to damage hepatic cells in laboratory studies conducted during the 1980s and 1990s, so it is no longer used in dietary supplements or fortified foods [3].
Vitamin K Intakes and Status

Most U.S. diets contain an adequate amount of vitamin K [7]. Data from the 2011–2012 National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) show that among children and teens age 2–19 years, the average daily vitamin K intake from foods is 66 mcg [20]. In adults age 20 and older, the average daily vitamin K intake from foods is 122 mcg for women and 138 mcg for men. When both foods and supplements are considered, the average daily vitamin K intake increases to 164 mcg for women and 182 mcg for men.

Some analyses of NHANES datasets from 2003–2006 and 2007–2010 raised concerns about average vitamin K intakes because only about one-third of the U.S. population had a vitamin K intake above the AI [21,22]. The significance of these findings is unclear because the AI is only an estimate of need, especially for vitamins (like vitamin K) that are also synthesized endogenously. Moreover, reports of vitamin K deficiency in adults are very rare [3,7]. Finally, food composition databases provide information primarily on phylloquinone; menaquinones—either dietary or from bacterial production in the gut—likely also contribute to vitamin K status [1,6,7].
Vitamin K Deficiency

Vitamin K deficiency is only considered clinically relevant when prothrombin time increases significantly due to a decrease in the prothrombin activity of blood [3,7]. Thus, bleeding and hemorrhage are the classic signs of vitamin K deficiency, although these effects occur only in severe cases. Because vitamin K is required for the carboxylation of osteocalcin in bone, vitamin K deficiency could also reduce bone mineralization and contribute to osteoporosis [23].

Vitamin K deficiency can occur during the first few weeks of infancy due to low placental transfer of phylloquinone, low clotting factor levels, and low vitamin K content of breast milk [7]. Clinically significant vitamin K deficiency in adults is very rare and is usually limited to people with malabsorption disorders or those taking drugs that interfere with vitamin K metabolism [3,7]. In healthy people consuming a varied diet, achieving a vitamin K intake low enough to alter standard clinical measures of blood coagulation is almost impossible [3].
Groups at Risk of Vitamin K Inadequacy

The following groups are among those most likely to have inadequate vitamin K status.
Newborns not treated with vitamin K at birth

Vitamin K transport across the placenta is poor, increasing the risk of vitamin K deficiency in newborn babies [3]. During the first few weeks of life, vitamin K deficiency can cause vitamin K deficiency bleeding (VKDB), a condition formerly known as classic hemorrhagic disease of the newborn. VKDB is associated with bleeding in the umbilicus, gastrointestinal tract, skin, nose, or other sites [7,24,25]. VKDB is known as early VKDB when it occurs in the first week of life. Late VKDB occurs at age 2–12 weeks, especially in exclusively breastfed infants due to the low vitamin K content of breast milk or in infants with malabsorption problems (such as cholestatic jaundice or cystic fibrosis) [7]. VKDB, especially late VKDB, can also be manifested as sudden intracranial bleeding, which has a high mortality rate [7,25]. To prevent VKDB, the American Academy of Pediatrics recommends the administration of a single, intramuscular dose of 0.5 to 1 milligram (mg) vitamin K1 at birth [24].
People with malabsorption disorders

People with malabsorption syndromes and other gastrointestinal disorders, such as cystic fibrosis, celiac disease, ulcerative colitis, and short bowel syndrome, might not absorb vitamin K properly [3,5,23]. Vitamin K status can also be low in patients who have undergone bariatric surgery, although clinical signs may not be present [26]. These individuals might need monitoring of vitamin K status and, in some cases, vitamin K supplementation.
Vitamin K and Health

This section focuses on two conditions in which vitamin K might play a role: osteoporosis and coronary heart disease.
Osteoporosis

Osteoporosis, a disorder characterized by porous and fragile bones, is a serious public health problem that affects more than 10 million U.S. adults, 80% of whom are women. Consuming adequate amounts of calcium and vitamin D, especially throughout childhood, adolescence, and early adulthood, is important to maximize bone mass and reduce the risk of osteoporosis [27]. The effect of vitamin K intakes and status on bone health and osteoporosis has been a focus of scientific research.

Vitamin K is a cofactor for the gamma-carboxylation of many proteins, including osteocalcin, one of the main proteins in bone [28]. Some research indicates that high serum levels of undercarboxylated osteocalcin are associated with lower bone mineral density [5,28]. Some, but not all, studies also link higher vitamin K intakes with higher bone mineral density and/or lower hip fracture incidence [29-34].

Although vitamin K is involved in the carboxylation of osteocalcin, it is unclear whether supplementation with any form of vitamin K reduces the risk of osteoporosis. In 2006, Cockayne and colleagues conducted a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials that examined the effects of vitamin K supplementation on bone mineral density and bone fracture [35]. Most of the trials were conducted in Japan and involved postmenopausal women; trial duration ranged from 6 to 36 months. Thirteen trials were included in the systematic review, and 12 showed that supplementation with either phytonadione or MK-4 improved bone mineral density. Seven of the 13 trials also had fracture data that were combined in a meta-analysis. All of these trials used MK-4 at either 15 mg/day (1 trial) or 45 mg/day (6 trials). MK-4 supplementation significantly reduced rates of hip fractures, vertebral fractures, and all nonvertebral fractures.

A subsequent clinical trial found that MK-7 supplementation (180 mcg/day for 3 years) improved bone strength and decreased the loss in vertebral height in the lower thoracic region of the vertebrae in postmenopausal women [36]. Other randomized clinical trials since the 2006 review by Cockayne et al. have found that vitamin K supplementation has no effect on bone mineral density in elderly men or women [37,38]. In one of these studies, 381 postmenopausal women received either 1 mg phylloquinone, 45 mg MK-4, or placebo daily for 12 months [38]. All participants also received daily supplements containing 630 mg calcium and 400 IU vitamin D3. At the end of the study, participants receiving either phylloquinone or MK-4 had significantly lower levels of undercarboxylated osteocalcin compared to those receiving placebo. However, there were no significant differences in bone mineral density of the lumbar spine or proximal femur among any of the treatment groups. The authors noted the importance of considering the effect of vitamin D on bone health when comparing the results of vitamin K supplementation studies, especially if both vitamin K and vitamin D (and/or calcium) are administered to the treatment group but not the placebo group [38]. The administration of vitamin D and/or calcium along with vitamin K could partly explain why some studies have found that vitamin K supplementation improves bone health while others have not.

In Japan and other parts of Asia, a pharmacological dose of MK-4 (45 mg) is used as a treatment for osteoporosis [5]. The European Food Safety Authority has approved a health claim for vitamin K, noting that "a cause and effect relationship has been established between the dietary intake of vitamin K and the maintenance of normal bone" [39]. FDA has not authorized a health claim for vitamin K in the United States.
Coronary heart disease

Vascular calcification is one of the risk factors for coronary heart disease because it reduces aortic and arterial elasticity [40]. MGP is a vitamin K-dependent protein that may play a role in the prevention of vascular calcification [5,41]. Although the full biological function of MGP is unclear, a hypothesis based on animal data suggests that inadequate vitamin K status leads to undercarboxylated MGP, which could increase vascular calcification and the risk of coronary heart disease. These findings might be particularly relevant for patients with chronic kidney disease because their rates of vascular calcification are much higher than those of the general population [9].

In an observational study conducted in the Netherlands in 564 postmenopausal women, dietary menaquinone (but not phylloquinone) intake was inversely associated with coronary calcification [42]. Menaquinone intake was also inversely associated with severe aortic calcification in a prospective, population-based cohort study involving 4,807 men and women age 55 years and older from the Netherlands [41]. Participants in this study who had dietary menaquinone intakes in the mid tertile (21.6–32.7 mcg/day) and upper tertile (>32.7 mcg/day) also had a 27% and 57% lower risk of coronary heart disease mortality, respectively, than those in the lower tertile of intake (<21.6 mcg/day). Phylloquinone intake had no effect on any outcome.

Despite these data, few trials have investigated the effects of vitamin K supplementation on arterial calcification or coronary heart disease risk. One randomized, double-blind clinical trial examined the effect of phylloquinone supplementation in 388 healthy men and postmenopausal women age 60–80 years [43]. Participants received either a multivitamin (containing B-vitamins, vitamin C, and vitamin E) plus 500 International Units (IU) vitamin D3, 600 mg calcium, and 500 mcg phylloquinone daily (treatment) or a multivitamin plus calcium and vitamin D3 only (control) for 3 years. There was no significant difference in coronary artery calcification between the treatment and control groups. However, among the 295 participants who adhered to the supplementation protocol, those in the treatment group had significantly less coronary artery calcification progression than those in the control group. Furthermore, among those with coronary artery calcification at baseline, phylloquinone treatment reduced calcification progression by 6% compared to the control group. Based on these findings, the authors did not make any clinical recommendations, and they called for larger studies in other populations.

At this time, the role of the different forms of vitamin K on arterial calcification and the risk of coronary heart disease is unclear, but it continues to be an active area of research in the general population and in patients with chronic kidney disease [5,9,44].
Health Risks from Excessive Vitamin K

The FNB did not establish ULs for vitamin K because of its low potential for toxicity [3]. In its report, the FNB stated that "no adverse effects associated with vitamin K consumption from food or supplements have been reported in humans or animals."
Interactions with Medications

Vitamin K interacts with a few medications. In addition, certain medications can have an adverse effect on vitamin K levels. Some examples are provided below. Individuals taking these and other medications on a regular basis should discuss their vitamin K status with their health care providers.
Warfarin (Coumadin) and similar anticoagulants

Vitamin K can have a serious and potentially dangerous interaction with anticoagulants such as warfarin (Coumadin) as well as phenprocoumon, acenocoumarol, and tioclomarol, which are commonly used in some European countries [7,8]. These drugs antagonize the activity of vitamin K, leading to the depletion of vitamin K-dependent clotting factors. People taking warfarin and similar anticoagulants need to maintain a consistent intake of vitamin K from food and supplements because sudden changes in vitamin K intakes can increase or decrease the anticoagulant effect [45].
Antibiotics

Antibiotics can destroy vitamin K-producing bacteria in the gut, potentially decreasing vitamin K status. This effect might be more pronounced with cephalosporin antibiotics, such as cefoperazone (Cefobid), because these antibiotics might also inhibit the action of vitamin K in the body [6,46]. Vitamin K supplements are usually not needed unless antibiotic use is prolonged (beyond several weeks) and accompanied by poor vitamin K intake [46].
Bile acid sequestrants

Bile acid sequestrants, such as cholestyramine (Questran) and colestipol (Colestid), are used to reduce cholesterol levels by preventing reabsorption of bile acids. They can also reduce the absorption of vitamin K and other fat-soluble vitamins, although the clinical significance of this effect is not clear [46,47]. Vitamin K status should be monitored in people taking these medications, especially when the drugs are used for many years [47].
Orlistat

Orlistat is a weight-loss drug that is available as both an over-the-counter (Alli) and prescription (Xenical) medication. It reduces the body's absorption of dietary fat and in doing so, it can also reduce the absorption of fat-soluble vitamins, such as vitamin K. Combining orlistat with warfarin therapy might cause a significant increase in prothrombin time [48]. Otherwise, orlistat does not usually have a clinically significant effect on vitamin K status, although clinicians usually recommend that patients taking orlistat take a multivitamin supplement containing vitamin K [49-51].
Vitamin K and Healthful Diets

The federal government's 2020–2025 Dietary Guidelines for Americans notes that "Because foods provide an array of nutrients and other components that have benefits for health, nutritional needs should be met primarily through foods. ... In some cases, fortified foods and dietary supplements are useful when it is not possible otherwise to meet needs for one or more nutrients (e.g., during specific life stages such as pregnancy)."

For more information about building a healthy dietary pattern, refer to the Dietary Guidelines for Americans and the USDA's MyPlate.

The Dietary Guidelines for Americans describes a healthy dietary pattern as one that

    Includes a variety of vegetables; fruits; grains (at least half whole grains); fat-free and low-fat milk, yogurt, and cheese; and oils.
        Many vegetables are excellent sources of vitamin K, and some fruits and fruit juices contain vitamin K. Cheese contains vitamin K.
    Includes a variety of protein foods such as lean meats; poultry; eggs; seafood; beans, peas, and lentils; nuts and seeds; and soy products.
        ​​​​​​​Soybeans and nuts contain vitamin K.
    Limits foods and beverages higher in added sugars, saturated fat, and sodium.
    Limits alcoholic beverages.
    Stays within your daily calorie needs.

References

    Booth SL. Vitamin K: food composition and dietary intakes. Food Nutr Res 2012;56.
    [PubMed abstract]
    Ferland G. Vitamin K. In: Erdman JW, Macdonald IA, Zeisel SH, eds. Present Knowledge in Nutrition. 10th ed. Washington, DC: Wiley-Blackwell; 2012:230-47.
    Institute of Medicine. Dietary reference intakes for vitamin A, vitamin K, arsenic, boron, chromium, copper, iodine, iron, manganese, molybdenum, nickel, silicon, vanadium, and zinc. Washington, DC: National Academy Press; 2001.
    Elder SJ, Haytowitz DB, Howe J, Peterson JW, Booth SL. Vitamin K contents of meat, dairy, and fast food in the U.S. Diet. J Agric Food Chem 2006;54:463-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Suttie JW. Vitamin K. In: Coates PM, Betz JM, Blackman MR, et al., eds. Encyclopedia of Dietary Supplements. 2nd ed. London and New York: Informa Healthcare; 2010:851-60.
    Conly JM, Stein K, Worobetz L, Rutledge-Harding S. The contribution of vitamin K2 (menaquinones) produced by the intestinal microflora to human nutritional requirements for vitamin K. Am J Gastroenterol 1994;89:915-23. [PubMed abstract]
    Suttie JW. Vitamin K. In: Ross AC, Caballero B, Cousins RJ, Tucker KL, Ziegler TR, eds. Modern Nutrition in Health and Disease. 11th ed. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2014:305-16.
    Ufer M. Comparative pharmacokinetics of vitamin K antagonists: warfarin, phenprocoumon and acenocoumarol.  Clin Pharmacokinet 2005;44:1227-46. [PubMed abstract]
    Schurgers LJ. Vitamin K: key vitamin in controlling vascular calcification in chronic kidney disease. Kidney Int2013;83:782-4. [PubMed abstract]
    Shearer MJ, Fu X, Booth SL. Vitamin K nutrition, metabolism, and requirements: current concepts and future research. Adv Nutr 2012;3:182-95. [PubMed abstract]
    Shearer MJ, Newman P. Metabolism and cell biology of vitamin K. Thromb Haemost 2008;100:530-47. [PubMed abstract]
    Sadowski JA, Hood SJ, Dallal GE, Garry PJ. Phylloquinone in plasma from elderly and young adults: factors influencing its concentration. Am J Clin Nutr 1989;50:100-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Schurgers LJ, Vermeer C. Determination of phylloquinone and menaquinones in food. Effect of food matrix on circulating vitamin K concentrations. Haemostasis 2000;30:298-307. [PubMed abstract]
    Walther B, Karl JP, Booth SL, Boyaval P. Menaquinones, bacteria, and the food supply: the relevance of dairy and fermented food products to vitamin K requirements. Adv Nutr 2013;4:463-73. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. CFE – Code of Federal Regulations Title 21, Sec. 573.620 Menadione dimethylpyrimidinol bisulfite. 2014.
    U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service. FoodData Central, 2019.
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Food Labeling: Revision of the Nutrition and Supplement Facts Labels. 2016.
    National Institutes of Health. Dietary Supplement Label Database. 2014.
    Schurgers LJ, Teunissen KJ, Hamulyak K, Knapen MH, Vik H, Vermeer C. Vitamin K-containing dietary supplements: comparison of synthetic vitamin K1 and natto-derived menaquinone-7. Blood 2007;109:3279-83. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service. What We Eat in America, 2009-2010. 2012.
    Fulgoni VL, 3rd, Keast DR, Bailey RL, Dwyer J. Foods, fortificants, and supplements: Where do Americans get their nutrients? J Nutr 2011;141:1847-54. [PubMed abstract]
    Wallace TC, McBurney M, Fulgoni VL, 3rd. Multivitamin/mineral supplement contribution to micronutrient intakes in the United States, 2007-2010. J Am Coll Nutr 2014;33:94-102. [PubMed abstract]
    Jagannath VA, Fedorowicz Z, Thaker V, Chang AB. Vitamin K supplementation for cystic fibrosis. The Cochrane database of systematic reviews 2013;4:CD008482. [PubMed abstract]
    American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on F, Newborn. Controversies concerning vitamin K and the newborn. American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Fetus and Newborn. Pediatrics 2003;112:191-2. [PubMed abstract]
    Pichler E, Pichler L. The neonatal coagulation system and the vitamin K deficiency bleeding - a mini review.  Wien Med Wochenschr. 2008;158:385-95. [PubMed abstract]
    Heber D, Greenway FL, Kaplan LM, Livingston E, Salvador J, Still C, et al. Endocrine and nutritional management of the post-bariatric surgery patient: an Endocrine Society Clinical Practice Guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2010;95:4823-43. [PubMed abstract]
    National Institutes of Health. Osteoporosis prevention, diagnosis, and therapy. NIH consensus statement 2000;17:1-45. [PubMed abstract]
    Gundberg CM, Lian JB, Booth SL. Vitamin K-dependent carboxylation of osteocalcin: friend or foe? Adv Nutr 2012;3:149-57. [PubMed abstract]
    Yaegashi Y, Onoda T, Tanno K, Kuribayashi T, Sakata K, Orimo H. Association of hip fracture incidence and intake of calcium, magnesium, vitamin D, and vitamin K. Eur J Epidemiol 2008;23:219-25. [PubMed abstract]
    Rejnmark L, Vestergaard P, Charles P, Hermann AP, Brot C, Eiken P, et al. No effect of vitamin K1 intake on bone mineral density and fracture risk in perimenopausal women. Osteoporos Int 2006;17:1122-32. [PubMed abstract]
    Feskanich D, Weber P, Willett WC, Rockett H, Booth SL, Colditz GA. Vitamin K intake and hip fractures in women: a prospective study. Am J Clin Nutr 1999;69:74-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Booth SL, Broe KE, Gagnon DR, Tucker KL, Hannan MT, McLean RR, et al. Vitamin K intake and bone mineral density in women and men. Am J Clin Nutr 2003;77:512-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Booth SL, Tucker KL, Chen H, Hannan MT, Gagnon DR, Cupples LA, et al. Dietary vitamin K intakes are associated with hip fracture but not with bone mineral density in elderly men and women. Am J Clin Nutr 2000;71:1201-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Chan R, Leung J, Woo J. No association between dietary vitamin K intake and fracture risk in chinese community-dwelling older men and women: a prospective study. Calcif Tissue Int 2012;90:396-403. [PubMed abstract]
    Cockayne S, Adamson J, Lanham-New S, Shearer MJ, Gilbody S, Torgerson DJ. Vitamin K and the prevention of fractures: systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Arch Intern Med 2006;166:1256-61. [PubMed abstract]
    Knapen MH, Drummen NE, Smit E, Vermeer C, Theuwissen E. Three-year low-dose menaquinone-7 supplementation helps decrease bone loss in healthy postmenopausal women. Osteoporos Int 2013;24:2499-507. [PubMed abstract]
    Booth SL, Dallal G, Shea MK, Gundberg C, Peterson JW, Dawson-Hughes B. Effect of vitamin K supplementation on bone loss in elderly men and women. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2008;93:1217-23. [PubMed abstract]
    Binkley N, Harke J, Krueger D, Engelke J, Vallarta-Ast N, Gemar D, et al. Vitamin K treatment reduces undercarboxylated osteocalcin but does not alter bone turnover, density, or geometry in healthy postmenopausal North American women. J Bone Miner Res 2009;24:983-91. [PubMed abstract]
    European Food Safety Authority. Scientific opinion on the substantiation of health claims related to vitamin K and maintenance of bone pursuant to Article 13(1) of Regulation (EC) No 1924/2006. The EFSA Journal 2009;7:1228.
    Demer LL, Tintut Y. Vascular calcification: pathobiology of a multifaceted disease. Circulation 2008;117:2938-48. [PubMed abstract]
    Geleijnse JM, Vermeer C, Grobbee DE, Schurgers LJ, Knapen MH, van der Meer IM, et al. Dietary intake of menaquinone is associated with a reduced risk of coronary heart disease: the Rotterdam Study. J Nutr 2004;134:3100-5. [PubMed abstract]
    Beulens JW, Bots ML, Atsma F, Bartelink ML, Prokop M, Geleijnse JM, et al. High dietary menaquinone intake is associated with reduced coronary calcification. Atherosclerosis 2009;203:489-93. [PubMed abstract]
    Shea MK, O'Donnell CJ, Hoffmann U, Dallal GE, Dawson-Hughes B, Ordovas JM, et al. Vitamin K supplementation and progression of coronary artery calcium in older men and women. Am J Clin Nutr 2009;89:1799-807. [PubMed abstract]
    Gallieni M, Fusaro M. Vitamin K and cardiovascular calcification in CKD: is patient supplementation on the horizon? Kidney Int 2014;86:232-4. [PubMed abstract]
    Drug-Nutrient Interaction Task Force, Clinical Center, National Institutes of Health. Important information to know when you are taking: warfarin (Coumadin) and vitamin K. 2012.
    Natural Medicines Comprehensive Database. Vitamin K. 2014.
    Vroonhof K, van Rijn HJ, van Hattum J. Vitamin K deficiency and bleeding after long-term use of cholestyramine.  Neth J Med 2003;61:19-21. [PubMed abstract]
    MacWalter RS, Fraser HW, Armstrong KM. Orlistat enhances warfarin effect. The Ann Pharmacother 2003;37:510-2. [PubMed abstract]
    McDuffie JR, Calis KA, Booth SL, Uwaifo GI, Yanovski JA. Effects of orlistat on fat-soluble vitamins in obese adolescents. Pharmacotherapy 2002;22:814-22. [PubMed abstract]
    Davidson MH, Hauptman J, DiGirolamo M, Foreyt JP, Halsted CH, Heber D, et al. Weight control and risk factor reduction in obese subjects treated for 2 years with orlistat: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 1999;281:235-42. [PubMed abstract]
    MedlinePlus. Orlistat. 2014. 
    U.S. Department of Agriculture USDHHS. Dietary Guidelines for Americans. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office; 2010.

Disclaimer

This fact sheet by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Office of Dietary Supplements (ODS) provides information that should not take the place of medical advice. We encourage you to talk to your health care providers (doctor, registered dietitian, pharmacist, etc.) about your interest in, questions about, or use of dietary supplements and what may be best for your overall health. Any mention in this publication of a specific product or service, or recommendation from an organization or professional society, does not represent an endorsement by ODS of that product, service, or expert advice.

Updated: March 29, 2021


 Dietary Supplements for Weight Loss: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals (original version)
Dietary Supplements for Weight Loss: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals
Table of Contents

    Introduction
    Regulation of Weight-Loss Dietary Supplements
    Common Ingredients in Weight-Loss Dietary Supplements
    Ephedra (Ma Huang), an Ingredient Banned from Dietary Supplements
    Safety Considerations
    Choosing a Sensible Approach to Weight Loss
    References
    Disclaimer

Introduction

This fact sheet provides information on weight-loss dietary supplements*, including summaries of research on the safety and efficacy of several of the most commonly used ingredients in these products.

More than two-third of adults and almost one-third of children and adolescents in the United States are overweight or have obesity [1,2]. Forty-five percent of Americans who are overweight and 67% of those with obesity are trying to lose weight [3].

Health experts agree that making lifestyle changes—including following a healthy dietary pattern, reducing caloric intake, and engaging in physical activity—is the basis for achieving long-term weight loss [4-7]. However, because making diet and lifestyle changes can be difficult, many people turn to dietary supplements promoted for weight loss in the hope that these products will help them more easily achieve their weight-loss goals.

Approximately 15% of U.S. adults have used a weight-loss dietary supplement at some point in their lives; more women report use (21%) than men (10%) [8]. Americans spend about $2.1 billion a year on weight-loss dietary supplements in pill form (e.g., tablets, capsules, and softgels) [9], and one of the top 20 reasons why people take dietary supplements is to lose weight [10].

Dietary supplements promoted for weight loss encompass a wide variety of products and come in a variety of forms, including capsules, tablets, liquids, powders, and bars [11]. Manufacturers market these products with various claims, including that these products reduce macronutrient absorption, appetite, body fat, and weight and increase metabolism and thermogenesis. Weight-loss products can contain dozens of ingredients, and some contain more than 90 [11]. Common ingredients in these supplements include botanicals (herbs and other plant components), dietary fiber, caffeine, and minerals.

In its report on dietary supplements for weight loss, the U.S. Government Accountability Office concluded that "little is known about whether weight loss supplements are effective, but some supplements have been associated with the potential for physical harm" [12]. Many weight-loss supplements are costly, and some of these products’ ingredients can interact or interfere with certain medications. Therefore, it is important to consider what is known—and not known—about each ingredient in any dietary supplement before using it.

People who are considering using weight-loss supplements should talk with their health care provider to discuss these products' potential benefits and risks. This is especially important for those who have medical conditions, including high blood pressure, diabetes, and liver or heart disease. However, according to a large national survey, less than one-third of U.S. adults who use weight-loss dietary supplements discuss this use with a health care professional [8].

———————————

*Dietary supplements are labeled with a Supplement Facts panel and do not include meal replacement shakes or prescription or over-the-counter medications.
Regulation of Weight-Loss Dietary Supplements

The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) regulates dietary supplements, including those promoted for weight loss [13]. Like other dietary supplements, weight-loss supplements differ from over-the-counter or prescription medications in that FDA does not classify them as drugs. Unlike drugs, dietary supplements do not require premarket review or approval by FDA. Supplement manufacturers are responsible for determining that their products are safe and their label claims are truthful and not misleading. If FDA finds a supplement to be unsafe, it may take enforcement action to remove the product from the market or ask the manufacturer to recall the product. FDA and the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) can also take regulatory actions against manufacturers that make unsubstantiated weight-loss claims about their products. FDA does not permit dietary supplements to contain pharmaceutical ingredients, and manufacturers may not promote dietary supplements to diagnose, treat, cure, or prevent any disease [13].

For more information about dietary supplement regulation, see the Office of Dietary Supplements (ODS) publication, Dietary Supplements: What You Need to Know.
Common Ingredients in Weight-Loss Dietary Supplements

Weight-loss dietary supplements contain a wide variety of ingredients. Not surprisingly, the amount of scientific information available on these ingredients varies considerably. In some cases, evidence of their purported benefits consists of limited data from animal and laboratory studies, rather than data from human clinical trials. In other cases, studies supporting a given ingredient’s use are small, of short duration, and/or of poor quality, limiting the strength of the findings. In almost all cases, additional research is needed to fully understand the safety and/or efficacy of a particular ingredient [3].

Complicating the interpretation of many study results is the fact that most weight-loss dietary supplements contain multiple ingredients, making it difficult to isolate the effects of each ingredient and predict the effects of the combination. Evidence may exist for just one of the ingredients in a finished product, and no evidence may be available for an ingredient when it is combined with other ingredients. Furthermore, dosages and amounts of active components vary widely among weight-loss supplements, and a product’s composition is not always fully described in published studies [14]. Studies might also use different and sometimes inappropriate assessment techniques to measure the effectiveness of a given treatment. All of these factors can make it difficult to compare the results of one study with those of another.

Table 1 briefly summarizes the findings discussed in more detail in this fact sheet on the safety and efficacy of the most common ingredients of weight-loss dietary supplements. These ingredients are listed and discussed in the table and text in alphabetical order. Dosage information is provided when it is available. However, because ingredients might not be standardized and many products contain proprietary blends of ingredients, the active compounds and their amounts might not be comparable among products [15].
Table 1: Common Ingredients in Weight-Loss Dietary Supplements* Ingredient 	Proposed Mechanism of Action 	Evidence of Efficacy** 	Evidence of Safety**
African mango (Irvingia gabonensis) 	Inhibits adipogenesis and reduces leptin levels 	Few clinical trials, all with small sample sizes

Research findings: Possible modest reduction in body weight and waist circumference 	No safety concerns reported for up to 3,150 mg/day for 10 weeks

Reported adverse effects: Headache, difficulty sleeping, flatulence, and gas
Beta-glucans 	Increase satiety and gastrointestinal transit time and slow glucose absorption 	Several clinical trials with weight loss as a secondary outcome

Research findings: No effect on body weight 	No safety concerns reported for up to 10 g/day for 12 weeks

Reported adverse effects: Flatulence
Bitter orange (Citrus aurantium L.) 	Increases energy expenditure and lipolysis; acts as a mild appetite suppressant. Synephrine is the proposed active constituent. 	Small clinical trials of poor methodological quality

Research findings: Possible increase in resting metabolic rate and energy expenditure; inconclusive effects on weight loss 	Some safety concerns reported, especially for combinations with other stimulants

Reported adverse effects: Chest pain, anxiety, headache, musculoskeletal complaints, and increased blood pressure and heart rate
Caffeine (as added caffeine or from guarana, kola nut, yerba maté, or other herbs) 	Stimulates central nervous system; increases thermogenesis and fat oxidation 	Short-term clinical trials of combination products

Research findings: Possible modest effect on body weight or decreased weight gain over time 	Safety concerns not usually reported at intakes less than 400–500 mg/day for adults; significant safety concerns at higher doses

Reported adverse effects: Nervousness, jitteriness, vomiting, and tachycardia
Calcium 	Increases lipolysis; decreases fat accumulation and fat absorption 	Several large clinical trials

Research findings: No effect on body weight, weight loss, or prevention of weight gain based on clinical trials 	No safety concerns reported at recommended intakes (1,000–1,200 mg/day for adults)

Reported adverse effects: Constipation, kidney stones, and interference with zinc and iron absorption at intakes above 2,000–2,500 mg for adults
Capsaicin and other capsaicinoids 	Increase energy expenditure and lipid oxidation, increase satiety, and reduce energy intake 	Several clinical trials, mostly focused on energy intake and appetite

Research findings: Might reduce energy intake but no effect on body weight 	Few safety concerns reported for up to 33 mg/day for 4 weeks or 4 mg/day for 12 weeks

Reported adverse effects: Gastrointestinal distress, increased insulin levels, and decreased high-density lipoprotein (HDL) levels
Carnitine 	Increases fatty acid oxidation 	Several clinical trials with weight loss as a secondary outcome

Research findings: Possible modest reduction in body weight 	No safety concerns reported for up to 2 g/day for 1 year or 4 g/day for 56 days

Reported adverse effects: Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal cramps, and a fishy body odor; might increase trimethylamine N-oxide (TMAO) levels, which are linked to greater cardiovascular disease risk
Chitosan 	Binds dietary fat in the digestive tract 	Small clinical trials, mostly of poor methodological quality

Research findings: Minimal effect on body weight 	Few safety concerns reported for 0.24–15 g/day for up to 6 months; could cause allergic reactions

Reported adverse effects: Flatulence, bloating, constipation, indigestion, nausea, and heartburn
Chromium 	Increases lean muscle mass; promotes fat loss; and reduces food intake, hunger levels, and fat cravings 	Several clinical trials of varying methodological quality

Research findings: Minimal effect on body weight and body fat 	No safety concerns reported for recommended intakes (20–45 mcg/day for adults)

Reported adverse effects: Headache, watery stools, constipation, weakness, vertigo, nausea, vomiting, and urticaria (hives)
Coleus forskohlii 	Enhances lipolysis and reduces appetite. Forskolin is the proposed active constituent. 	Few short-term clinical trials

Research findings: No effect on body weight 	No safety concerns reported at typical doses of 500 mg/day for 12 weeks

Reported adverse effects: More frequent bowel movements, loose stools
Conjugated linoleic acid 	Increases lipolysis, reduces lipogenesis, and promotes apoptosis in adipose tissue 	Several clinical trials

Research findings: Minimal effect on body weight and body fat 	Few safety concerns reported for 2.4–6 g/day for up to 12 months

Reported adverse effects: Abdominal discomfort and pain, constipation, diarrhea, loose stools, dyspepsia, and (possibly) adverse effects on blood lipids and glucose homeostasis
Fucoxanthin 	Increases energy expenditure and fatty acid oxidation; suppresses adipocyte differentiation and lipid accumulation 	Studied only in combination with pomegranate-seed oil in one trial in humans

Research findings: Insufficient research to draw firm conclusions 	No safety concerns reported from one clinical trial that used 2.4 mg/day for 16 weeks, but not rigorously studied

Reported adverse effects: None known
Garcinia cambogia (hydroxycitric acid) 	Inhibits lipogenesis, suppresses food intake. Hydroxycitric acid is the proposed active constituent. 	Several short-term clinical trials of varying methodological quality

Research findings: Little to no effect on body weight 	Some safety concerns reported

Reported adverse effects: Headache, nausea, upper respiratory tract symptoms, gastrointestinal symptoms, mania, and liver damage
Glucomannan 	Increases feelings of satiety and fullness, prolongs gastric emptying time 	Several clinical trials of varying methodological quality, mostly focused on effects on lipid and blood glucose levels

Research findings: Little to no effect on body weight 	Significant safety concerns reported for tablet forms, which might cause esophageal obstructions, but few safety concerns with up to 15.1 g/day of other forms for several weeks

Reported adverse effects: Loose stools, flatulence, diarrhea, constipation, and abdominal discomfort
Green coffee bean extract (Coffea arabica, Coffea canephora, Coffea robusta) 	Inhibits fat accumulation, modulates glucose metabolism 	Few clinical trials, all of poor methodological quality

Research findings: Possible modest effect on body weight 	Few safety concerns reported for up to 200 mg/day for as long as 12 weeks, but not rigorously studied; contains caffeine

Reported adverse effects: Headache and urinary tract infections
Green tea (Camellia sinensis) and green tea extract 	Increases energy expenditure and fat oxidation; reduces lipogenesis and fat absorption 	Several clinical trials of good methodological quality on green tea catechins with and without caffeine

Research findings: Possible modest effect on body weight 	No safety concerns reported for use as a beverage, contains caffeine; some safety concerns reported for green tea extract

Reported adverse effects (for green tea extract): Constipation, abdominal discomfort, nausea, increased blood pressure, and liver damage
Guar gum 	Acts as bulking agent in gut, delays gastric emptying, increases feelings of satiety 	Several clinical trials of good methodological quality

Research findings: No effect on body weight 	Few safety concerns reported with currently available formulations containing up to 30 g/day for as long as 6 months

Reported adverse effects: Abdominal pain, flatulence, diarrhea, nausea, and cramps
Hoodia (Hoodia gordonii) 	Suppresses appetite, reduces food intake 	Very little published research in humans

Research findings: No effect on energy intake or body weight based on one study 	Some safety concerns reported; increases heart rate and blood pressure

Reported adverse effects: Headache, dizziness, nausea, and vomiting
Probiotics 	Alter gut microbiota, affecting nutrient and energy extraction from food and altering energy expenditure 	Several clinical trials

Research findings: Inconsistent effects on body fat, waist and hip circumference, and body weight 	No safety concerns reported for healthy individuals

Reported adverse effects: Gastrointestinal symptoms, such as gas
Pyruvate 	Increases lipolysis and energy expenditure 	Few clinical trials, all of weak methodological quality

Research findings: Possible minimal effect on body weight and body fat 	Few safety concerns reported for up to 30 g/day for as long as 6 weeks, but not well studied

Reported adverse effects: Diarrhea, gas, bloating, and (possibly) decreased HDL levels
Raspberry ketone 	Alters lipid metabolism 	Studied only in combination with other ingredients

Research findings: Insufficient research to draw firm conclusions 	No safety concerns reported in one 8-week study, but not well studied

Reported adverse effects: None known
Vitamin D 	None proposed; associations exist between low vitamin D status and obesity 	Several clinical trials

Research findings: No effect on body weight 	No safety concerns reported at recommended intakes of 15–20 mcg (600–800 International Units [IU]/day for adults); toxic at very high intakes; tolerable upper intake level of 100 mcg (4,000 IU)/day for adults

Reported adverse effects: Anorexia, weight loss, polyuria, heart arrhythmias, and increased calcium levels leading to vascular and tissue calcification
White kidney bean (Phaseolus vulgaris) 	Interferes with breakdown and absorption of carbohydrates by acting as a starch blocker 	Several clinical trials of varying methodological quality

Research findings: Possible modest effect on body weight and body fat 	Few safety concerns reported for up to 3,000 mg/day for as long as 12 weeks

Reported adverse effects: Headache, soft stools, flatulence, and constipation
Yohimbe (Pausinystalia yohimbe) 	Has hyperadrenergic effects. Yohimbine is the proposed active constituent. 	Very little research on yohimbe for weight loss

Research findings: No effect on body weight; insufficient research to draw firm conclusions 	Significant safety concerns reported, especially for yohimbine doses of 20 mg or higher

Reported adverse effects: Headache, anxiety, agitation, hypertension, and tachycardia, myocardial infarction, cardiac failure, and death

* References to support statements in Table 1 are provided in subsequent text.
**The evidence of efficacy and safety is for the individual ingredients. The efficacy and safety of these ingredients might be different when they are combined with other ingredients in a product.
African Mango [Irvingia gabonensis (Aubry-Lecomte ex O’Rorke) Baill.]

African mango, or Irvingia gabonensis, is a fruit-bearing tree that is native to western and central Africa [16]. Irvingia gabonensis seed kernel extract has been proposed to promote weight loss by inhibiting adipogenesis, as demonstrated in vitro [17]. In addition, a proprietary extract of Irvingia gabonensis, IGOB131, reduces serum levels of leptin [18], a hormone that is positively correlated with body weight and percentage body fat [19]. IGOB131 might also reduce total cholesterol and low-density lipoprotein (LDL) levels [18].
Efficacy

Studies have examined the effects of Irvingia gabonensis on weight loss to only a limited extent in humans. A clinical trial conducted in Cameroon randomized 102 adults with overweight or obesity (body mass index [BMI] >25) to receive either 150 mg IGOB131 or placebo 30–60 minutes before lunch and dinner (300 mg total daily dose) for 10 weeks [18]. Participants who received the extract had significantly lower body weight, body fat, and waist circumference at the end of the trial than those taking a placebo. This trial, along with two others, was included in a 2013 systematic review whose authors reported that Irvingia gabonensis extract causes statistically significant reductions in body weight and waist circumference [19]. The authors noted, however, that the trials included in the review used different study methodologies, small samples, short intervention periods, and varying daily doses of Irvingia gabonensis extract (300 mg to 3,150 mg); in addition, the trials were all conducted by the same authors. Additional trials with larger samples and diverse populations are needed to determine whether Irvingia gabonensis extract is effective for weight loss [19].
Safety

Irvingia gabonensis extract appears to be well tolerated. No adverse effects have been found in rats at doses up to 2,500 mg/kg body weight per day [20], but its safety has not been rigorously studied in humans. Most reported adverse effects are mild, including headache, difficulty sleeping, flatulence, and gas [19]. However, Irvingia gabonensis has been associated with renal failure in a patient with chronic kidney disease [21].
Beta-Glucans

Beta-glucans are glucose polysaccharides found in bacteria, yeasts, fungi, and cereal grains (such as oats and barley). As soluble dietary fibers, beta-glucans are proposed to increase satiety and gastrointestinal transit time and to slow glucose absorption [16]. Consumption of beta-glucans from barley has been shown to reduce energy intake and appetite in humans [22].
Efficacy

Several studies have investigated the effects of beta-glucans on blood lipids, blood pressure, and insulin resistance, with weight loss as a secondary outcome. In one of these studies, 66 women who were overweight followed a low-calorie diet (designed to produce a 0.5 kg/week weight loss) for 3 months that was supplemented with 5–6 g/day beta-glucan (from oat bran), 8–9 g/day beta-glucan, or no beta-glucan (control) [23]. At the end of the trial, all groups lost weight and had a smaller waist circumference, but there were no significant differences between groups. Similarly, other trials have found that 3–10 g/day beta-glucans for 4–12 weeks does not have a significant effect on weight loss [16].
Safety

Beta-glucans appear to be well tolerated. Reported adverse effects include increased flatulence but not changes in stool consistency, stool frequency, or bloating [24].
Bitter Orange [(Citrus aurantium L.); zhi qiao]

Bitter orange is the common name for the botanical Citrus aurantium. The fruit of this plant is a source of p-synephrine (often referred to simply as synephrine) and other protoalkaloids [25- 28]. As alpha-adrenergic agonists, synephrine alkaloids can mimic the action of epinephrine and norepinephrine. However, the extent to which bitter orange and synephrine cause similar cardiovascular and central nervous system effects to epinephrine and norepinephrine (e.g., increased heart rate and blood pressure) is not clear [25-27].

Studies suggest that bitter orange increases energy expenditure and lipolysis and that it acts as a mild appetite suppressant [25,27]. After FDA banned the use of ephedrine alkaloids in dietary supplements in 2004 [see section on ephedra (má huáng)], manufacturers replaced ephedra with bitter orange in many products; thus, bitter orange became known as an ephedra substitute [29]. Although synephrine has some structural similarities to ephedrine, it has different pharmacological properties [27,30].
Efficacy

Several small human studies have examined whether bitter orange is effective for weight loss [30]. Interpreting the results of these studies is complicated by the fact that bitter orange is almost always combined with other ingredients in weight-loss supplements.

In one study, 20 healthy adults who were overweight (BMI >25) took a product containing 975 mg bitter orange extract (6% synephrine alkaloids), 528 mg caffeine, and 900 mg St. John’s wort; a placebo; or nothing (control) each day for 6 weeks [31]. All participants also took part in a circuit-training exercise program and were counseled to consume 1,800 kcal/day. At the end of the study, participants taking the combination bitter orange product had a significantly greater reduction in percent body fat and fat mass and a greater increase in basal metabolic rate than those in the placebo and control groups. Participants in all groups lost weight, but the authors did not report whether the mean reduction in body weight in the treatment group (1.4 kg) was significantly greater than that in the placebo group (0.9 kg) or control group (0.4 kg) [32].

In another study, eight healthy people with overweight or obesity (BMI 25–40) received counseling to follow a 1,200–1,500 kcal/day diet and were randomized to take either an herbal supplement containing bitter orange (18 mg synephrine/day) and other ingredients, including guarana extract as a source of caffeine (396 mg caffeine/day), or placebo [33]. The peak rise in resting metabolic rate at baseline was significantly higher in participants taking the herbal supplement than those in the placebo group, but the difference was not significant at the end of the 8-week study. Participants taking the herbal supplement had a significant increase in mean body weight (1.13 kg) compared with those taking a placebo (0.09 kg) at the end of the study. However, this increase in body weight did not significantly affect body fat and lean tissue levels or waist circumference. The authors noted that the weight gain might have occurred by chance because the trial was insufficiently powered to detect this small difference.

The authors of a 2012 review of 23 small human clinical studies involving a total of 360 participants concluded that synephrine increases resting metabolic rate and energy expenditure [30]. The authors of an earlier review of animal studies, clinical trials, physiologic studies, and case reports concluded that synephrine alkaloids have a “suggestion of some benefit to weight loss,” but the available data are very limited and cannot be considered conclusive [25]. Similarly, a 2011 systematic review of four weight loss trials (including the two described above) concluded that the evidence of efficacy for bitter orange/synephrine is contradictory and weak [34]. According to all of these reviews, longer term clinical trials with rigorous designs and large samples are needed to determine the value of bitter orange for weight loss.
Safety

Products containing bitter orange may have significant safety concerns. Reported adverse effects include chest pain, headache, anxiety, elevated heart rate, musculoskeletal complaints, ventricular fibrillation, ischemic stroke, myocardial infarction, and death [34,35]. However, many of the products with these effects contain multiple herbal ingredients, and the role of bitter orange in these adverse effects cannot be isolated. Some studies indicate that bitter orange and synephrine—as bitter orange extract or pure synephrine—raise blood pressure and heart rate, but other studies show that they do not have these effects [25-27,31,36-39]. For example, a single dose of 900 mg bitter orange standardized to 6% (54 mg) synephrine significantly increased heart rate as well as systolic and diastolic blood pressure for up to 5 hours compared to placebo in 15 healthy men and women [38]. However, in an 8-week clinical trial in 80 healthy, resistance-trained adult men, a dietary supplement containing bitter orange extract (providing 20 mg synephrine/day), 284 mg caffeine, and other ingredients did not increase resting heart rate, systolic or diastolic blood pressure, or reported side effects at 4 and 8 weeks compared to placebo or the same supplement formulation without synephrine [40]. Some researchers have suggested that synephrine might not act directly as a cardiovascular stimulant [27,37,39]. Instead, caffeine, other stimulants in multicomponent formulations, and other constituents of bitter orange or adulterants (such as m-synephrine, which is not naturally present in bitter orange) might be responsible for its observed effects.
Caffeine, Including Caffeine from Guarana, Kola Nut, Yerba Maté, or Other Herbs

Many dietary supplements promoted for weight loss contain added caffeine or an herbal source—such as guarana (Paullinia cupana), kola (or cola) nut (Cola nitida), and yerba maté (Ilex paraguariensis)—that naturally contains caffeine. Green tea and other forms of tea also contain caffeine (see section on green tea). Some weight-loss supplement labels do not declare the amount of caffeine in the product and only list the herbal ingredients. As a result, consumers might not be aware that the presence of certain herbs means that a product contains caffeine and possibly other stimulants [41].

Caffeine is a methylxanthine that stimulates the central nervous system, heart, and skeletal muscles. It also increases gastric and colonic activity and acts as a diuretic [42,43]. Caffeine has a half-life of about 6 hours; blood levels increase within 15–45 minutes of consumption, and they peak at around 60 minutes [44]. Caffeine increases thermogenesis in a linear, dose-dependent fashion in humans [45]. A 100 mg dose of caffeine, for example, increased energy expenditure by a mean of 9.2 kcal/hr more than placebo in healthy humans, and this effect lasted for 3 hours or more. Caffeine might also contribute to weight loss by increasing fat oxidation through sympathetic activation of the central nervous system and by increasing fluid loss [41,45]. Habitual use of caffeine however, leads to caffeine tolerance and a diminishment of these effects [41,43].
Efficacy

Caffeine increases energy expenditure and fat oxidation [44]. However, the extent to which these effects affect weight loss is less clear, partly because clinical trials examining the effects of caffeine on weight loss have all been short and have used combination products. In one study, 167 participants with overweight or obesity (BMI 25–40) took a supplement containing kola nut (192 mg/day caffeine) and ma huang (90 mg/day ephedrine) or placebo [46]. Participants were counseled to eat a normal diet except for limiting dietary fat to 30% of calories and to exercise moderately. After 6 months, those in the treatment group lost significantly more weight (mean weight loss 5.3 kg) than those in the placebo group (2.6 kg) and had significantly greater body fat reduction. A product containing caffeine plus glucosyl hesperidin (G-hesperidin, a flavonone glycoside found mainly in citrus fruits) reduced abdominal fat and BMI in a clinical trial in Japan [47]. In this study, 75 healthy men and women who were overweight (BMI 24–30) received one of five treatments daily for 12 weeks while maintaining their regular lifestyle and eating habits. The five treatments were placebo and four formulations of 0, 25, 50, or 75 mg caffeine plus 500 mg G-hesperidin. The 75 mg caffeine plus G-hesperidin significantly reduced BMI by a mean of 0.56 versus 0.02 for placebo. The 50 or 75 mg caffeine plus G-hesperidin also significantly reduced abdominal fat compared to placebo, whereas the G-hesperidin alone or with only 25 mg caffeine did not significantly affect BMI or abdominal fat. These findings indicate that the higher doses of caffeine might be responsible for the observed effects.

In another study, 47 adults who were overweight (BMI 26–30) were randomized to take a combination product containing 336 mg yerba maté (1%–1.5% caffeine), 285 mg guarana (3%–6% caffeine), and 108 mg damiana (a botanical extract that contains essential oils, resins, and tannins but not caffeine) or placebo 15 minutes before each main meal for 45 days while maintaining their normal eating habits [48]. At the end of the study, participants taking the herbal product lost a mean of 5.1 kg compared to 0.3 kg for those taking the placebo.

Data from a 12-year prospective observational study provide some insight into the long-term association between caffeine intake and body weight [49]. In this study, researchers followed 18,417 healthy men and 39,740 healthy women enrolled in either the Nurses’ Health Study or the Health Professionals Follow-Up Study. On average, participants gained some weight during the study, but men who increased their caffeine intake during the 12 years of follow-up gained a mean of 0.43 kg less than those who decreased their caffeine consumption. For women, the corresponding mean difference in weight gain was 0.35 kg less. In a cross-sectional study, German adults who had lost weight and maintained the weight loss (n = 494) reported significantly higher consumption of coffee and other caffeinated beverages (mean intake 3.83 cups/day) than the general population (n = 2,129, mean intake 3.35 cups/day), suggesting that caffeine might help with weight loss maintenance [50]. However, further research is needed to confirm this finding.
Safety

For healthy adults, FDA and the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) state that up to 400 mg/day caffeine does not pose safety concerns [51,52], whereas the American Medical Association recommends a limit of 500 mg/day [53]. For comparison, an 8-ounce cup of brewed coffee contains about 85–100 mg caffeine. FDA and EFSA have not set a safe level of intake for children, but the American Medical Association recommends that adolescents consume no more than 100 mg/day, and the American Academy of Pediatrics discourages children and adolescents from consuming caffeine and other stimulants [51-54].

Caffeine can cause sleep disturbances and feelings of nervousness, jitteriness, and shakiness. Caffeine can be toxic at doses of 15 mg/kg (about 1,000 mg for a 150-lb adult), causing nausea, vomiting, tachycardia, seizures, and cerebral edema [42]. Doses above 150 mg/kg (about 10,000 mg for a 150-lb adult) can be fatal. Combining caffeine with other stimulants, such as bitter orange and ephedrine, can potentiate these adverse effects. According to an analysis, 47% of calls to the California Poison Control System in 2006 reporting adverse effects or toxicities potentially caused by dietary supplements involved products containing caffeine [55]
Calcium

Calcium is an essential mineral that is stored in the bones and teeth, where it supports their structure and function. Calcium is required for vascular contraction and vasodilation, muscle function, nerve transmission, intracellular signaling, and hormonal secretion [56]. The Recommended Dietary Allowance (average daily level of intake sufficient to meet the nutrient needs of 97%–98% of healthy individuals) for calcium ranges from 1,000 to 1,300 mg/day for children and adults age 4 years and older.

Several studies have correlated higher calcium intakes with lower body weight or less weight gain over time [57-61]. Two explanations have been proposed. First, high calcium intakes might reduce calcium concentrations in fat cells by decreasing the production of parathyroid hormone and the active form of vitamin D. Decreased intracellular calcium concentrations, in turn, might increase fat breakdown and discourage fat accumulation in these cells [59]. Second, calcium from food or supplements might bind to small amounts of dietary fat in the digestive tract and prevent absorption of this fat [59,62,63]. Dairy products, in particular, might contain additional components that have even greater effects on body weight than their calcium content alone would suggest [60,64-67]. For example, protein and other components of dairy products might modulate appetite-regulating hormones [61].
Efficacy

A 2014 randomized crossover trial in 15 healthy young men found that diets high in milk or cheese (supplying a total of 1,700 mg/day calcium) significantly increased fecal fat excretion compared to a control diet that supplied 500 mg calcium/day [68]. However, the results from clinical trials examining the effects of calcium on body weight have been largely negative. For example, supplementation with 1,500 mg/day calcium (from calcium carbonate) was investigated in 340 adults with overweight or obesity (BMI ≥25) with mean baseline calcium intakes of 878 mg/day (treatment group) and 887 mg/day (placebo group) [69]. Compared to placebo, calcium supplementation for 2 years had no clinically significant effects on weight.

The authors of four reviews of published studies on the effects of calcium from supplements or dairy products on weight management reached similar conclusions [70-73]. These reviews include a 2009 evidence report from the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality whose authors concluded that, overall, clinical trial results do not support an effect of calcium supplementation on weight [70]. In addition, a 2015 meta-analysis of 41 randomized controlled trials found no benefit of calcium supplementation or increased dairy food consumption for body weight or body fat [73]. A 2016 meta-analysis of 33 randomized trials and longitudinal studies lasting 12 weeks to 6 years found that calcium from foods or supplements had no overall effect on body weight [74]. However, in subgroup analyses, calcium did reduce body weight in some groups, including children, adolescents, adult men, premenopausal women, women older than 60, and people with normal BMI [74]. Overall, the results from clinical trials do not support a clear link between higher calcium intakes and lower body weight, prevention of weight gain, or weight loss.
Safety

The Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL; maximum daily intake unlikely to cause adverse health effects) for calcium established by the Institute of Medicine of the National Academies (now the Academy of Medicine at the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine) is 2,500 mg/day for adults age 19–50 years and 2,000 mg for adults age 51 and older [56]. High intakes of calcium can cause constipation and might interfere with the absorption of iron and zinc, although this effect is not well established. High intakes of calcium from supplements, but not foods, have been associated with an increased risk of kidney stones [56,75-77].
Capsaicin and Other Capsaicinoids

Capsaicinoids give chili peppers their characteristic pungent flavor. Capsaicin is the most abundant and well-studied capsaicinoid [78]. Capsaicin and other capsaicinoids have been proposed to have anti-obesity effects via their ability to increase energy expenditure and lipid oxidation, attenuate postprandial insulin response, increase satiety, and reduce appetite and energy intake [78-82]. Other research suggests that capsaicin increases satiety by inducing gastrointestinal distress (e.g., pain, burning sensation, nausea, and bloating, which could all reduce the desire to eat) rather than by releasing satiety hormones [82].
Efficacy

Most research on capsaicin and other capsaicinoids focuses on their effects on energy intake and appetite, rather than body weight. A meta-analysis of eight randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trials evaluated the effects of capsaicinoids on ad libitum energy intake in a total of 191 participants who had a normal body weight or were moderately overweight [78]. Doses of capsaicinoids ranged from 0.2 mg in a single meal to 33 mg/day for 4 weeks (via chili powder, chili-containing foods, or chili capsules). Overall, consuming capsaicinoids significantly reduced energy intake by a mean of 74 kcal per meal; body weight was not assessed, so the impact of this calorie reduction on weight loss cannot be quantified. The authors noted that the results suggest that at least 2 mg capsaicinoids are needed to reduce calorie intake but that the studies were very heterogeneous.

A 2017 clinical trial compared 2 mg/day and 4 mg/day capsaicinoid supplements for 12 weeks in 77 adults who were overweight [83]. At the end of the trial, participants receiving 4 mg/day capsaicinoids reported a mean intake of 252 fewer calories per day than those receiving placebo and a mean of 140 fewer calories per day than those receiving 2 mg/day capsaicinoids. However, the calorie reductions did not significantly affect body weight at either 6 weeks or 12 weeks.
Safety

Supplementation with 4 mg/day capsaicinoids can cause gastrointestinal distress [83]. It might also increase serum insulin and reduce high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol levels. Otherwise, capsaicin and other capsaicinoids appear to be safe. Research is underway to reduce the pungency and chili taste associated with capsaicin while retaining its potential biological effects [81].
Carnitine

Carnitine is the generic term for several compounds, including L-carnitine itself, several acylcarnitines (e.g., acetyl-L-carnitine), and propionyl-L-carnitine. It is composed of the amino acids lysine and methionine [84]. Carnitine is naturally present in animal products such as meat, fish, poultry, and milk and dairy products; small amounts are present in some plant foods. Humans synthesize carnitine from its constituent amino acids, so dietary carnitine intake is not necessary. Almost all cells of the body contain carnitine, which transports fatty acids into the mitochondria and acts as a cofactor for fatty acid beta-oxidation [85]. Because of these effects, carnitine has been proposed as a weight-loss agent.
Efficacy

Studies have primarily evaluated carnitine’s effects on lipid levels, cardiovascular disease, and type 2 diabetes; weight loss has been a secondary outcome in most studies. In a clinical trial in 258 patients with uncontrolled type 2 diabetes, 2 g/day L-carnitine plus the pharmaceutical ingredient orlistat (360 mg/day) for 1 year significantly increased weight loss compared to orlistat alone [86]. However, 2 g/day L-carnitine alone for 6 months did not affect weight loss in 94 men and women who were overweight and had newly diagnosed type 2 diabetes [87]. A 2016 systematic review and meta-analysis combined the results from nine carnitine supplementation clinical trials in adults (including the two described above) that assessed weight loss [85].The trials included a total of 911 participants. In eight trials, the daily carnitine doses ranged from 1.8 to 4 g/day L-carnitine or levocarnitine for 30 to 360 days; in one trial, the dose of L-carnitine was 15 mg/kg/day for 182 days. Overall, study participants who received carnitine supplements lost an average of 1.33 kg more weight than those who received a placebo. Additional research on carnitine for weight loss is warranted.
Safety

Carnitine supplements are well tolerated and generally safe at doses up to about 4 g/day, although they can cause nausea, vomiting, abdominal cramps, diarrhea, and a fishy body odor [88-90]. Rarer side effects include muscle weakness in patients with uremia and seizures in those with seizure disorders.

Some research indicates that intestinal bacteria metabolize carnitine to form trimethylamine N-oxide (TMAO), a substance that might increase the risk of cardiovascular disease [91]. This effect appears to be more pronounced in people who consume meat than in vegans or vegetarians. The implications of this effect are not well understood and require more research.
Chitosan

Chitosan is a manufactured polysaccharide that is commercially prepared from the exoskeletons of crustaceans. It is purported to promote weight loss by binding to some dietary fat in the digestive tract, preventing its absorption [16,41]. Chitosan might also decrease cholesterol absorption [16].
Efficacy

In a small study, 12 healthy men and 12 healthy women (BMI 20–36) followed the same diet for 12 days (five meals per day with 38% of energy from fat) [92]. Chitosan capsules taken before meals (total of 2.5 g/day) slightly increased fecal fat excretion in the men compared to the control group. However, the amount of fat that the chitosan trapped would result in a loss of only 1 lb body fat over about 7 months. Chitosan had no significant effect on fecal fat excretion in the women compared to the control group.

One clinical trial randomly assigned 59 women with overweight or obesity (BMI 27–40) to receive either chitosan (3 g/day divided between the two largest meals) or placebo for 8 weeks while continuing their normal dietary and exercise habits [93]. At the end of the study, those in the treatment group lost a mean of 1 kg body weight compared to a mean weight gain of 1.5 kg in the placebo group. The effect of chitosan (3 g/day) with or without ascorbic acid (2 g/day) was evaluated in an 8-week study in women age 20–30 who were overweight and who followed their regular diet and exercise habits [94]. In this study, chitosan treatment reduced body weight (mean weight loss about 2.5 kg) compared to placebo (mean weight loss about 1 kg); the addition of ascorbic acid led to additional body weight reductions of about 1.5 kg compared to chitosan alone. In contrast, in a 28-day trial, chitosan (2 g/day divided into two equal doses) failed to reduce body weight compared to placebo in 28 women who were overweight and in 6 men who were overweight and who maintained their normal diet during the study [95]. The authors of a Cochrane Review that included 13 trials examining the effect of chitosan on body weight found that chitosan, when taken for 4 weeks to 6 months, reduced body weight by a mean of 1.7 kg compared with placebo [96]. They concluded that chitosan appears to be more effective than placebo for short-term weight loss, but most studies have been of poor quality. The authors also noted that results from high-quality trials indicate that chitosan has minimal effects on body weight, and these effects are probably clinically insignificant.
Safety

The adverse effects of chitosan are minor and primarily involve the gastrointestinal tract. They include flatulence, bloating, mild nausea, constipation, indigestion, and heartburn [93,95,96]. Because chitosan is derived from shellfish, people who are allergic to shellfish could theoretically be allergic to chitosan [97].
Chromium

The trivalent form of chromium (chromium III) is an essential trace mineral that potentiates the action of insulin. The Institute of Medicine of the National Academies (now the Academy of Medicine at the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine) has established an Adequate Intake for chromium of 20–35 mcg/day for nonpregnant, nonlactating adults [98]. Dietary supplements commonly contain chromium in the form of chromium picolinate, which consists of chromium and picolinic acid, although they might also contain other forms, including chromium nicotinate and chromium yeast [99]. Poor chromium status might contribute to impaired glucose tolerance and type 2 diabetes [98]. Researchers have hypothesized that chromium supplements increase lean muscle mass and promote fat loss, but study results have been equivocal [41,100]. Some research indicates that these supplements might also reduce food intake, hunger levels, and fat cravings [101], although data on these effects are sparse.
Efficacy

Several studies have evaluated the effects of chromium supplements, usually in the form of chromium picolinate, on weight loss. A 2013 Cochrane Review analyzed the results from nine randomized controlled trials of chromium picolinate supplements in a total of 622 participants with overweight or obesity (BMI ≥25) [100]. Trial durations ranged from 8 weeks to 6 months, and doses of chromium picolinate were 200 to 1,000 mcg/day. Six of the trials included resistance or weight training, and three did not. Chromium picolinate supplementation reduced body weight by 1.1 kg more than placebo, but the amount of weight loss did not correlate with the dose of chromium picolinate. The authors stated that the effect is of “debatable clinical relevance” and the overall quality of the evidence is low.

Also in 2013, a systematic review and meta-analysis of 11 randomized controlled trials (including most of the trials evaluated in the Cochrane Review) examined the effects of chromium supplementation in a total of 866 individuals with overweight or obesity [99]. The authors concluded that daily doses of 137 to 1,000 mcg chromium for 8 to 26 weeks reduce body weight by 0.5 kg and percent body fat by 0.46%. Like the authors of the Cochrane Review, these authors noted that the effect is small and of "uncertain" clinical relevance. Similar findings were reported from an earlier meta-analysis of 12 trials [102].
Safety

Trivalent chromium appears to be well tolerated. Adverse effects from clinical trials include watery stools, headache, weakness, nausea, vomiting, constipation, vertigo, and urticaria (hives) [99,100]. Chromium does not have an established UL because few serious adverse effects have been linked to high intakes [98]. Hexavalent chromium (chromium VI) is toxic and not found in food or dietary supplements.
Cola (or kola) nut (see section on caffeine above)
Coleus forskohlii

Forskolin is a compound isolated from the roots of Coleus forskohlii, a plant that grows in subtropical areas, such as India and Thailand. Forskolin is purported to promote weight loss by enhancing lipolysis and reducing appetite [103,104], possibly by stimulating cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) production. This increased cAMP production, in turn, is thought to activate lipase and promote the release of fatty acids from adipose tissue [16].
Efficacy

Although animal studies indicate that forskolin reduces food intake [103,105], research in humans is very limited and inconclusive. In a small randomized double-blind trial, 19 women with overweight or obesity (BMI 25–35) age 18–40 years took either a placebo or an extract of Coleus forskohlii (250 mg standardized for 10% forskolin [ForsLean]) before breakfast and dinner for a total daily dose of 500 mg while continuing their usual diet for 12 weeks [106]. Compared to placebo, Coleus forskohlii extract had no effect on body weight, appetite, caloric intake, or macronutrient intake. The same Coleus forskohlii extract and dose were evaluated in another 12-week randomized double-blind trial involving 30 men who were overweight (BMI ≥26) [104]. In this study, Coleus forskohlii extract did not affect body weight, but it did significantly decrease mean body fat by about 4% compared with about 1% for placebo. A similar extract of Coleus forskohlii (500 mg/day standardized for 10% forskolin) also failed to reduce body weight compared to placebo in a 12-week trial in 30 adults with overweight or obesity (BMI >25) consuming a hypocaloric diet, although it significantly reduced plasma insulin concentrations [107].
Safety

In a study in mice, Coleus forskohlii extract caused dose-dependent hepatotoxicity, but pure forskolin did not have this effect, suggesting that other component(s) of Coleus forskohlii extract might be responsible for the hepatotoxicity [108]. In humans, forskolin might increase the frequency of bowel movements and cause loose stools [107], but doses of 500 mg/day (standardized for 10% forskolin) for 12 weeks have not been reported to cause more serious adverse events [104,106,107]. Forskolin has not been evaluated in longer term trials. Additional research is needed to better understand the safety and side effects of both short- and long-term use.
Conjugated Linoleic Acid

Conjugated linoleic acid (CLA) is a mixture of linoleic acid isomers containing conjugated double bonds that is present mainly in dairy products and beef. The various isomeric forms of CLA include c9,t11-CLA and t10,c12-CLA, and it is available in dietary supplements as a triacylglycerol or as a free fatty acid [109]. Researchers have suggested that CLA enhances weight loss by increasing lipolysis and fatty acid oxidation in skeletal muscle, reducing lipogenesis, and promoting apoptosis in adipose tissue [17,110].
Efficacy

Although CLA appears to reduce body fat mass in animals [17], results from human studies suggest that its effects are small and of questionable clinical relevance [111]. One double-blind, placebo-controlled trial evaluated the effects of CLA supplementation (as a 50:50 mixture of c9,t11-CLA and t10,c12-CLA) in 180 male and female volunteers who were overweight (BMI 25–30) consuming an ad libitum diet [109]. Participants received CLA as a free fatty acid (3.6 g CLA isomers), CLA as a triacylglycerol (3.4 g CLA isomers), or placebo daily for 1 year. At the end of the study, body fat mass dropped by significant amounts with both forms of CLA compared with placebo; reductions, on average, were 6.9% with CLA as a free fatty acid and 8.7% with the triacylglycerol form. Supplementation with CLA as a free fatty acid (but not as a triacylglycerol) also increased lean body mass compared with placebo.

In another double-blind crossover trial, daily supplementation with CLA oil (6.4 g CLA isomers—approximately equal amounts of c9,t11-CLA and t10,c12-CLA) for 16 weeks significantly reduced BMI and total body fat compared with safflower oil in 35 postmenopausal women with obesity (BMI >30) with type 2 diabetes [112]. These findings are similar to those from a 2012 randomized, double-blind, placebo- controlled trial in 63 adults with overweight or obesity (BMI 24–35) that found statistically significant, but small, reductions in mean weight (0.69 kg) and body fat (0.49 kg) compared to baseline after 12 weeks of CLA use (3.4 g/day, 50:50 mixture of c9,t11-CLA and t10,c12-CLA) [113]. In contrast, those in the placebo group did not lose a significant amount of body weight (0.09 kg) or body fat (0.1 kg) compared to baseline. However, 3.2 g/day CLA (isomer mixture, mainly c9,t11-50% and t10,c12-80%) combined with aerobic exercise for 8 weeks did not reduce body fat compared to placebo in 28 young women with obesity [114]. The authors of a systematic review and meta-analysis of seven randomized controlled trials concluded that taking 2.4–6 g/day CLA for 6–12 months reduces body weight by a mean of 0.7 kg and body fat by a mean of 1.33 kg compared to placebo [111]. However, the authors noted that the "magnitude of these effects is small, and the clinical relevance is uncertain."
Safety

CLA appears to be well tolerated. Most reported adverse effects are minor, consisting mainly of gastrointestinal disturbances, such as abdominal discomfort and pain, constipation, diarrhea, loose stools, nausea, vomiting, and dyspepsia [3,109,111,113,115,116]. CLA might also increase some markers of oxidative stress and decrease breastmilk fat levels, but additional research is needed to confirm these effects [117].

CLA has been linked to hepatitis in three case reports [118-120]. However, whether CLA caused this toxicity cannot be definitively established because the products were not analyzed to rule out the presence of a contaminant.

CLA might adversely affect lipid profiles, although results from studies are inconsistent. Some research indicates that CLA has no major effect on lipid profiles, but other research shows that certain CLA isomers might decrease HDL cholesterol and increase lipoprotein(a) levels [109,110,116,121-124]. The CLA isomer t10,c12-CLA has also been reported to increase insulin resistance and glycemia in men with obesity and metabolic syndrome [110,124].
Fucoxanthin

Fucoxanthin is a carotenoid in brown seaweed and other algae. Results from laboratory and animal studies suggest that fucoxanthin might promote weight loss by increasing resting energy expenditure and fatty acid oxidation as well as by suppressing adipocyte differentiation and lipid accumulation [125,126].
Efficacy

Only one clinical trial has been conducted on the possible weight-loss effects of fucoxanthin. This 16-week trial used Xanthigen, a dietary supplement containing brown seaweed extract and pomegranate-seed oil [127]. In one arm of this study, 110 premenopausal women with obesity (BMI >30), 72 of whom had nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), received either a placebo or Xanthigen three times a day before meals for a total daily dose of 2.4 mg fucoxanthin and 300 mg pomegranate-seed oil. Participants followed a controlled diet that limited total energy intake to 1,800 kcal/day. Compared to the placebo group, those receiving Xanthigen lost significantly more body weight by the end of the trial (mean loss of 6.9 kg vs. 1.4 kg for placebo in participants with NAFLD; mean loss of 6.3 kg vs. 1.4 kg for placebo in those without NAFLD). Because this is the only clinical trial on a dietary supplement containing fucoxanthin, additional research is needed to understand the supplement’s potential effects on body weight and the role of fucoxanthin versus that of the combination or pomegranate oil alone.
Safety

The safety of fucoxanthin has not been thoroughly evaluated in humans. Although participants using Xanthigen in the clinical trial described above reported no adverse effects [127], further investigation of the safety and potential side effects of fucoxanthin at various levels of intake is required.
Garcinia cambogia

Garcinia cambogia is a fruit-bearing tree that grows throughout Asia, Africa, and the Polynesian islands [128]. The pulp and rind of its fruit contain high amounts of hydroxycitric acid (HCA), a compound that has been proposed to inhibit lipogenesis, increase hepatic glycogen synthesis, suppress food intake, and reduce weight gain [6,15,109,128,129].
Efficacy

Studies in rats have found that Garcinia cambogia suppresses food intake and inhibits weight gain [3]. In humans, however, the evidence on whether Garcinia cambogia or HCA is effective for weight loss is conflicting, and any effects it has appear to be small [6,17,128-130].

In one randomized, placebo-controlled trial, 89 women who were mildly overweight (mean BMI 28.6) received Garcinia cambogia (800 mg 30–60 minutes before meals for a total daily dose of 2.4 g/day [1,200 mg HCA]) or placebo and followed a 1,200 kcal diet for 12 weeks [131]. Women receiving Garcinia cambogia lost significantly more weight (3.7 kg) than those receiving placebo (2.4 kg). However, Garcinia cambogia did not alter appetite, and the study produced no evidence that the supplement affected feelings of satiety. In another double-blind, placebo-controlled trial, 135 men and women who were overweight (BMI 27–38) received either Garcinia cambogia (1,000 mg 30 minutes before each meal for a total daily dose of 3,000 mg/day [1,500 mg HCA]) or placebo and followed a high-fiber, low-energy diet for 12 weeks [132]. Participants in both groups lost weight, but the between-group weight-loss differences were not statistically significant. HCA also had no effect on body fat loss.

A 2011 review and meta-analysis of 12 randomized controlled trials with a total of 706 participants examined the effects of Garcinia cambogia on weight loss [130]. The findings from nine of the trials (those that had data suitable for statistical pooling) indicate that when taken for 2–12 weeks, Garcinia cambogia (1,000–2,800 mg/day HCA) reduces body weight in the short term by a mean of 0.88 kg compared to placebo. However, the authors noted that most of the studies had methodological issues; when they considered the two rigorously designed trials only (which used 1,500 mg/day and 2,800 mg/day HCA), the effect was no longer statistically significant. Therefore, the effect of Garcinia cambogia on body weight remains uncertain. The authors of a 2013 review reached similar conclusions, noting that whether Garcinia cambogia/HCA is effective for obesity "remains to be proven in larger-scale and longer-term clinical trials" [133].
Safety

The reported adverse effects of Garcinia cambogia and HCA are generally mild and include headache, nausea, upper respiratory tract symptoms, and gastrointestinal symptoms [128,130,132]. However, dietary supplements containing Garcinia cambogia have been implicated in three cases of mania, which might have been caused by the serotonergic activity of HCA [134]. Symptoms included grandiosity (an unrealistic sense of superiority), irritability, pressured speech, and decreased need for sleep. Reports have also described 10 cases of liver toxicity, resulting in one death and two liver transplants, in people taking products containing Garcinia cambogia [43,135-137]. In most of these cases, the products contained other botanical ingredients and minerals as well, so the toxicity cannot be definitively attributed to Garcinia cambogia. Because all clinical trials of Garcinia cambogia and HCA have been short, its long-term safety is unknown.
Glucomannan

Glucomannan is a soluble dietary fiber derived from konjac root (Amorphophallus konjac) that can absorb up to 50 times its weight in water [16]. Like guar gum, glucomannan has been proposed to increase feelings of satiety and fullness and prolong gastric emptying by absorbing water in the gastrointestinal tract [16,138,139]. It might also reduce fat and protein absorption in the gut [16].
Efficacy

Glucomannan appears to have beneficial effects on blood lipids and glucose levels [139], but its effects on weight loss are inconsistent. In one study in Italy, 2 g/day glucomannan in two divided doses in 60 children (mean age 11.2 years) with obesity for 2 months did not significantly affect weight loss compared to placebo [140]. In a small study conducted in the United States, 20 women with obesity (weighing ≥20% more than ideal body weight) consumed 3 g/day glucomannan (1 g before each meal) or placebo for 8 weeks [141]. At the end of the study, glucomannan produced significantly greater weight loss (mean loss of 2.5 kg) than placebo (mean gain of 0.7 kg). In another study conducted in the United States, supplementation with glucomannan (3.9 g/day) for 4 weeks in 63 healthy men did not significantly reduce body weight compared with placebo [142]. Eight weeks of glucomannan supplementation (1.33 g before each meal for a total of 3.99 g/day) also failed to significantly reduce body weight compared to placebo in 53 adults with overweight or obesity who continued their usual dietary and physical activity habits [143].

The authors of a 2015 systematic review of six randomized controlled trials with a total of 293 participants concluded that 1.24 to 3.99 g/day glucomannan for up to 12 weeks does not have a significant effect on body weight compared to placebo [144,145]. Similarly, a 2014 meta-analysis of eight trials that included 301 participants found that glucomannan did not significantly affect weight loss compared to placebo [146]. The authors of an older meta-analysis of 14 studies designed primarily to investigate glucomannan's effect on lipid and blood glucose levels concluded that 1.2 to 15.1 g/day glucomannan reduces body weight by a small but statistically significant amount (mean loss 0.79 kg more than placebo) over about 5 weeks [139].
Safety

Little is known about the long-term safety of glucomannan. Glucomannan appears to be well tolerated for short-term use, with minor adverse effects, including belching, bloating, loose stools, flatulence, diarrhea, constipation, and abdominal discomfort [139,143,144,146]. The use of tablet forms of glucomannan was reported to be associated with seven cases of esophageal obstruction in 1984–1985 in Australia [99]. Users should therefore be cautious when taking glucomannan tablets. Powdered and capsule forms have not been associated with this effect [147].
Green Coffee Bean Extract (Coffea arabica, Coffea canephora, Coffea robusta)

The seeds (or beans) of the coffee plant (Coffea arabica, Coffea canephora, Coffea robusta) are green until they are roasted. Compared to roasted beans, green coffee beans have higher levels of chlorogenic acid. Green coffee extract, probably because of its chlorogenic acid content, inhibits fat accumulation in mice and humans by regulating adipogenesis. Green coffee extract also modulates glucose metabolism [148-150], perhaps by reducing glucose absorption in the gut [151]. Green coffee beans contain caffeine (see section on caffeine above) [152], although decaffeinated forms are available [16].
Efficacy

In mice, green coffee bean extract in combination with a high-fat diet significantly reduced body weight gain and fat mass [149,150]. Only a few clinical trials have examined the effects of green coffee bean extract on weight loss in humans, and all were of poor methodological quality. Onakpoya and colleagues conducted a meta-analysis of three trials in which participants who were overweight received either 180 or 200 mg/day green coffee bean extract for 4 to 12 weeks [151]. The researchers concluded that green coffee bean extract has a moderate but significant effect on body weight (mean weight loss of 2.47 kg more than placebo), but they noted that the methodological quality of all studies included in the meta-analysis was poor.

The authors of another small clinical trial claimed to show a benefit of green coffee bean extract for weight loss [153], but the study was strongly criticized by the FTC for having several critical flaws in its design [154,155]. Two of the three study authors subsequently retracted the journal publication.
Safety

Green coffee bean extract appears to be well tolerated, but its safety has not been rigorously studied. Reported adverse effects include headaches and urinary tract infections [151]. The caffeine naturally present in green coffee beans acts as a stimulant and can cause adverse effects, depending on the dose and whether it is combined with other stimulants (see section on caffeine above).
Green Tea (Camellia sinensis) and Green Tea Extract

Green tea (Camellia sinensis) is a popular beverage consumed worldwide that has several purported health benefits [156]. Green tea is present in some dietary supplements, frequently in the form of green tea extract. The active components of green tea that are associated with weight loss are caffeine (see section on caffeine above) and catechins, primarily epigallocatechin gallate (EGCG), which is a flavonoid [41,156]. A typical brewed cup of green tea has about 240–320 mg catechins [156] and 45 mg caffeine. It has been suggested that green tea and its components might reduce body weight by increasing energy expenditure and fat oxidation, reducing lipogenesis, and decreasing fat absorption [41,157-160]. Green tea might also decrease carbohydrate digestion and absorption [161]. Available green tea extracts cover the range from minimally processed tea leaves to highly processed, manufactured concentrates of single constituents, such as EGCG.

The authors of a meta-analysis of six randomized controlled trials with a total of 98 participants found that caffeine alone or in combination with catechins significantly increases energy expenditure in a dose-dependent fashion compared with placebo [157]. This effect might be important for maintaining weight loss by helping counteract the decrease in metabolic rate that can occur during weight loss. Catechins combined with caffeine also significantly increase fat oxidation, but caffeine alone does not. Other human research indicates that EGCG alone does not increase resting metabolic rate, fat oxidation, or the thermic effect of feeding (the increase in metabolic rate associated with the digestion and absorption of food) [162,163].Taken together, these findings suggest that green tea catechins and caffeine might act synergistically [41,157,158].
Efficacy

Several human studies have examined the effects of green tea catechins on weight loss and weight maintenance. A 2012 Cochrane Review analyzed the results from 14 randomized controlled trials of green tea preparations in a total of 1,562 participants with overweight or obesity [164]. The trials lasted from 12 to 13 weeks, and doses of green tea catechins ranged from 141 to 1,207 mg; in 10 of the 14 trials, the green tea preparations contained caffeine. Green tea supplementation reduced body weight by a mean of 0.95 kg more than placebo. However, when the authors analyzed the six studies that were conducted outside of Japan (where study methodologies were less heterogeneous than in the Japanese studies), they found no statistically significant difference in weight loss for green tea compared to placebo.

Another systematic review and meta-analysis included 15 randomized controlled trials, 6 of which examined the effects of caffeine (39–83 mg/day) with and without green tea catechins (576–690 mg/day) on anthropometric measurements. The authors reported that green tea catechins combined with caffeine over a median of 12 weeks modestly yet significantly reduced body weight by a mean of 1.38 kg and waist circumference by a mean of 1.93 cm compared with caffeine alone [165]. Only two studies in this meta-analysis examined the effects of green tea catechins alone. Their results suggest that green tea catechins alone do not affect body weight or other anthropometric measurements. A subsequent trial also found that decaffeinated green tea extract containing EGCG (1,315 mg/day total catechins) for 12 months had no overall effect on body weight, BMI, or waist circumference in 121 postmenopausal women with overweight or obesity [166].

A meta-analysis of 11 randomized controlled trials found that people who took EGCG combined with caffeine for 12–13 weeks lost a mean of 1.31 kg more body weight (or gained 1.31 kg less weight) than those in control groups [167]. In 2010, EFSA examined health claims related to green tea and concluded that "a cause and effect relationship has not been established between the consumption of catechins (including EGCG) from green tea … and contribution to the maintenance or achievement of a normal body weight" [168]. Taken together, the findings of these studies suggest that if green tea is an effective weight-loss aid, any effect it has is small and not likely to be clinically relevant [164,165].
Safety

No adverse effects have been reported from the consumption of green tea as a beverage [156]. For green tea extract, most reported adverse effects are mild to moderate, and they include nausea, constipation, abdominal discomfort, and increased blood pressure [164]. Toxicology studies in rats and mice show that green tea extract does not cause cancer but does cause nonneoplastic lesions in many areas of the body, including the nose, liver, and bone marrow [169]. Other evidence in mice shows that high doses of catechins cause liver toxicity. There is also increasing evidence in humans that green tea extract might cause liver damage, though the underlying mechanism is not well understood [170]. An analysis of 1,021 postmenopausal women participating in the Minnesota Green Tea Trial found that women who consumed green tea extract containing 1,315 mg total catechins (including 843 mg EGCG) and 15.8 mg caffeine daily for 12 months had significantly increased liver enzymes compared to those taking a placebo, and some women developed moderate or more severe liver function abnormalities [170]. Other research indicates that green tea polyphenols do not elevate liver enzymes or cause liver dysfunction when consumed by healthy men for 3 weeks at a dose of 714 mg/day [171].

Consumption of some green tea extracts—primarily ethanolic extracts of green tea—has also been linked to liver damage in at least 50 case reports since 2006 [43,172]. In 2008, the U.S. Pharmacopeia (USP) systematically reviewed the safety of green tea products [173]. Based on 34 of the liver damage case reports and animal pharmacological and toxicological information, the USP concluded that the consumption of green tea products "probably" caused 7 cases of liver damage and “possibly” caused 27 cases. The USP noted that problems are more likely when green tea extract is taken on an empty stomach and, therefore, advises taking green tea extracts with food to minimize the possible risk of liver damage. Other researchers and medical experts advise using dietary supplements containing green tea extract only with caution [156].
Guarana (see section on caffeine above)
Guar Gum

Guar gum is a soluble dietary fiber derived from seeds of the Indian cluster bean Cyamopsis tetragonolobus [16,174]. Guar gum is present in certain dietary supplements and is an ingredient in some food products, especially gluten-free baked goods, because it helps bind and thicken these products. Like glucomannan, guar gum is purported to promote weight loss by acting as a bulking agent in the gut; delaying gastric emptying; increasing feelings of satiety; and, theoretically, decreasing appetite and food intake [16,174].
Efficacy

The authors of a review of guar gum’s effects on appetite control concluded that a dose of 2–5 g increases satiety and reduces the frequency of between-meal snacking [175]. However, guar gum does not appear to enhance weight loss. In a 2001 meta-analysis of 20 randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials that statistically pooled data from 11 trials, Pittler and colleagues evaluated the effects of guar gum for body weight reduction in a total of 203 adults [174]. Trial participants included people with hypercholesterolemia, hyperlipidemia, or type 1 or type 2 diabetes; menopausal women; and healthy volunteers. Doses of guar gum ranged from 9 to 30 g/day for 3 weeks to 6 months; most participants followed their usual diet, and some received dietary advice. Compared with placebo, guar gum had no significant effect on weight loss. The authors concluded that guar gum is not effective for body weight reduction. More recently, a randomized study in 44 adults with type 2 diabetes who followed their usual diet found that 10 g/day guar gum significantly reduced waist circumference after 4 and 6 weeks compared to baseline, but it did not affect weight loss [176].
Safety

Reported adverse effects for guar gum are primarily gastrointestinal and include abdominal pain, flatulence, diarrhea, increased number of bowel movements, nausea, and cramps [174,176,177]. Case reports indicate that guar gum can cause severe esophageal and small-bowel obstruction if taken without sufficient fluid [178,179]. However, these reports were about a guar gum product that is no longer available [178]. In their meta-analysis, Pittler and colleagues concluded that given the adverse effects associated with the use of guar gum, the risks of taking it outweigh its benefits [174].
Hoodia (Hoodia gordonii)

Hoodia gordonii is a succulent plant that grows in the Kalahari Desert of southern Africa. The San people have traditionally used hoodia as an appetite suppressant during long hunts. This anecdotal evidence, combined with results of a few animal studies indicating that hoodia reduces food intake [180], led to the widespread marketing of hoodia as a weight-loss supplement in the United States in the early 2000s.

Scientists have not determined the exact mechanism whereby hoodia might suppress appetite. A glycoside commonly called P57, which may have central nervous system activity [181], is widely believed to be the main active ingredient, although not all researchers agree [16,182].
Efficacy

Despite its popularity as a weight-loss supplement, very little scientific research on hoodia has been conducted in humans [183]. In a randomized controlled trial, 49 healthy women (mean BMI 25) age 18–50 years were randomized to receive Hoodia gordonii purified extract (2,220 mg/day in two divided doses taken 1 hour before breakfast and dinner) or placebo combined with an ad libitum diet for 15 days [184]. Compared to placebo, hoodia extract had no significant effect on energy intake or body weight.
Safety

Hoodia has been reported to cause significant increases in heart rate and blood pressure [184]. It also raises bilirubin and alkaline phosphatase levels (which may indicate impaired liver function), although the clinical significance of these findings is unclear because hoodia has not been reported to affect levels of other liver enzymes. Other side effects include headache, dizziness, nausea, and vomiting.

In the past, some hoodia products were found to contain little or no hoodia [185]. According to a report released in 2007, only 30%–60% of hoodia products contained adequate amounts of hoodia, although the authors did not indicate whether adequate referred to a therapeutic dose or whether the quantity of hoodia matched the label claim [186]; no more recent data on hoodia content in supplements is available.
Maté (see section on caffeine above)
Probiotics

The human microbiota, which outnumber human cells by up to 10-fold, have myriad roles in human health [187,188]. Although microbes are found throughout the human body, the vast majority inhabit the colon. The gut microbiota play an important role in nutrient and energy extraction from food. Research in mice suggests that the gut microbiota affect not only use of energy from the diet but also energy expenditure and storage within the host [189]. Whether these effects translate to humans is unknown. However, manipulating the gut microbiota has been proposed as a method to prevent or treat obesity in humans, and probiotics might provide a way to accomplish this. Probiotics are in foods, such as some yogurts, as well as dietary supplements. The many different genera of probiotics include Lactobacillus, Streptococcus, and Bifidobacterium, which all have widely varying effects in the body [188,189].
Efficacy

Much of the research on probiotics and its influence on the gut microbiota and obesity has been in mice, and the results have been promising. For example, probiotic supplementation reduced body weight gain and fat accumulation in obese mice fed a high-fat diet [190].

In humans, however, results of clinical trials that assessed the impact of probiotics on obesity-related endpoints have been inconsistent. One 12-week clinical trial, for example, randomized 210 healthy adults age 35 to 60 years who had large amounts of visceral fat to consume 200 g/day fermented milk containing 107, 106, or 0 (control) colony-forming units (CFU) of Lactobacillus gasseri SBT2055 (LG2055) per gram of milk [191]. Participants who received 107 or 106 CFU/g milk of Lactobacillus gasseri experienced significant reductions in visceral fat area (mean reductions of 8.5% and 8.2%, respectively), BMI, waist and hip circumference, and body fat mass compared with the control group. In another randomized clinical trial, daily supplementation with 3.24 x 108 CFU Lactobacillus rhamnosus CGMCC1.3724 for 24 weeks combined with an energy-restricted diet for the first 12 weeks (500 kcal/day less than estimated calorie needs) did not significantly affect weight loss compared with placebo in 125 adults age 18 to 55 years with obesity [192]. However, among the 77 female participants, the Lactobacillus supplementation did significantly reduce body weight after 12 weeks (loss of 1.8 kg) and 24 weeks (loss of 2.6 kg) compared with placebo.

A 2017 systematic review of 14 clinical trials, including the two described above, in 1,067 individuals with overweight or obesity showed that probiotics (mostly Lactobacillus administered at various doses for 3 weeks to 6 months) significantly decreased body weight and/or body fat in nine trials, had no effect in three trials, and increased body weight in two trials [193]. Another recent systematic review and meta-analysis of 15 randomized controlled trials in 957 individuals with overweight or obesity found that supplementation with various doses and strains of probiotics for 3 to 12 weeks resulted in larger reductions in body weight (by 0.6 kg), BMI (by 0.27 kg/m2), and fat percentage (by 0.6%) than placebo [194]. However, these effects were small and of questionable clinical significance.

The most recent systematic review and meta-analysis, which included 19 randomized trials in 1,412 participants, found that supplementation with probiotics or synbiotics (products containing both probiotic organisms and prebiotic sugars, which microorganisms in the gastrointestinal tract use as metabolic fuel) reduced waist circumference slightly (by 0.82 cm) but had no effect on body weight or BMI, although the quality of evidence was low to moderate [195]. The findings from another meta-analysis of 14 trials in 881 adults, 5 trials in 726 children, and 12 trials in 1,154 infants suggested that probiotics promote an average loss of 0.54 kg in adults, an average gain of 0.20 kg in children, and no significant weight loss or gain in infants [196].

Taken together, these results indicate that the effects of probiotics on body weight and obesity might depend on several factors, including the probiotic strain, dose, and duration as well as certain characteristics of the user, including age, sex, and baseline body weight. Additional research is needed to understand the potential effects of probiotics on body fat, body weight, and obesity in humans.
Safety

Many probiotic strains derive from species with a long history of safe use in foods or from microorganisms that colonize healthy gastrointestinal tracts. For these reasons, the common probiotic species—such as Lactobacillus species (acidophilus, casei, fermentum, gasseri, johnsonii, paracasei, plantarum, rhamnosus, and salivarius) and Bifidobacterium species (adolescentis, animalis, bifidum, breve, and longum)—are unlikely to cause harm [197].

Side effects of probiotics are usually minor and consist of self-limited gastrointestinal symptoms, such as gas. In a few cases, mainly involving individuals who were severely ill or immunocompromised, the use of probiotics has been linked to bacteremia, fungemia (fungi in the blood), or infections that result in severe illness [198,199]. For individuals with compromised immune function or other serious underlying diseases, the World Gastroenterology Organisation advises restricting probiotic use to the strains and indications that have proven efficacy [197].
Pyruvate

Pyruvate is a three-carbon compound that is generated in the body through glycolysis [200]. Pyruvate is also available as a dietary supplement, frequently in the form of calcium pyruvate. Researchers have suggested that pyruvate enhances exercise performance and reduces body weight and body fat, possibly by increasing lipolysis and energy expenditure [6,201,202].
Efficacy

Only a few studies have examined the effects of pyruvate supplementation in humans. Although some of these studies suggest that pyruvate decreases body weight and body fat, others do not. In a double-blind, placebo-controlled trial, 26 men and women who were overweight (BMI ≥25) were given 6 g/day pyruvate or placebo for 6 weeks [200]. All participants received counseling to follow a 2,000 kcal/day diet and completed 45–60 minutes of circuit training three times per week. At the end of the trial, the pyruvate group had significant decreases in body weight (mean loss of 1.2 kg), body fat, and percent body fat compared to baseline but no significant changes in lean body mass. In the placebo group, these measurements did not change significantly compared to baseline.

Another small study of 14 women with obesity (BMI 28–53) found that 30 g/day pyruvate produced greater weight loss and fat loss when isoenergetically substituted for a glucose placebo for 21 days as part of a liquid low-energy diet [203]. However, a double-blind, placebo-controlled trial in 23 women who were overweight (mean BMI 27.4) who followed their normal diets and participated in weight training and 30 minutes of walking three times per week had a different outcome [202]. In this trial, supplementation with 5 g/day calcium pyruvate for 30 days did not significantly affect body weight, body fat, percent body fat, or lean body mass compared with placebo. The authors of a systematic review and meta-analysis of six randomized controlled trials in a total of 203 participants concluded that 5–30 g pyruvate for 3–6 weeks reduces body weight by a mean of 0.72 kg and body fat by a mean of 0.54 kg compared to placebo [201]. However, the authors noted that the methodological quality of all trials is weak, preventing them from drawing firm conclusions.
Safety

The safety of pyruvate has not been rigorously studied. Pyruvate causes gas, bloating, diarrhea, and borborygmus (rumbling noise in intestines resulting from gas) but has no serious adverse effects when taken at doses up to 30 g/day for as long as 6 weeks [200,201,203]. Pyruvate might also increase LDL levels and decrease HDL levels [201,202]. Additional research is needed to better understand the safety and possible side effects of this compound.
Raspberry Ketone

Raspberry ketone is the primary aroma compound found in red raspberries (Rubus idaeus), and it is added to some foods as a flavoring agent [16,204]. In vitro and animal studies suggest that raspberry ketone might help prevent weight gain by increasing fatty acid oxidation, suppressing lipid accumulation, and inhibiting pancreatic lipase activity [16]. Although it has been touted on the Internet and national television as an effective way to burn fat, little evidence exists to support this claim.
Efficacy

In mice fed a high-fat diet, raspberry ketone supplementation reduced food intake and body weight compared to the same diet without raspberry ketone [205].

Only one randomized controlled trial has examined the effects of a dietary supplement containing raspberry ketone on weight loss. In this trial, 70 men and women age 21–45 who were overweight (BMI >27) received daily supplementation with either a placebo or a weight-loss product, Prograde Metabolism (METABO) [206]. This product contained 2,000 mg of a proprietary blend of raspberry ketone, caffeine, bitter orange, ginger, garlic, cayenne, L-theanine, and pepper extract along with B-vitamins and chromium. During the 8-week study, participants followed a calorie-restricted diet (approximately 500 calories less per day than estimated needs) and engaged in moderate exercise (60 minutes 3 days per week). Compared to the placebo group, those receiving METABO lost significantly more body weight (mean loss of 1.9 kg vs. 0.4 kg for placebo) and fat mass. However, 25 of the 70 participants dropped out of the study, and results were reported for only the 45 participants who completed the study (i.e., the authors did not complete an intention-to-treat analysis). Furthermore, the product contained many ingredients in addition to raspberry ketone, making it impossible to determine the effects of raspberry ketone alone.
Safety

Typical diets provide only a few mg of raspberry ketone a day. Doses contained in dietary supplements typically range from 100 to 1,400 mg, and the safety of such doses has never been evaluated in humans [204]. Participants in the METABO study described above had no serious adverse effects [206]. However, additional research on raspberry ketone is needed to better understand its safety and side effects.
Vitamin D

Vitamin D, which is fat soluble, is present in a few foods, such as fatty fish, cheese, egg yolks, and vitamin D-fortified milk. It is also available in many dietary supplements, and humans synthesize it naturally when their skin is exposed to sunlight. Vitamin D promotes calcium absorption in the gastrointestinal tract and is needed for proper bone growth and remodeling [56].

Observational studies indicate that greater body weights are associated with lower vitamin D status, and individuals with obesity frequently have marginal or deficient circulating levels of vitamin D [207]. Although obesity does not affect the skin’s capacity to synthesize vitamin D, greater amounts of subcutaneous fat sequester more of the vitamin and alter its release into the circulation. Nevertheless, the association between vitamin D and obesity raises the question of whether increasing vitamin D concentrations might reduce body weight [207,208].
Efficacy

Despite the association between low vitamin D levels and obesity, scientific evidence does not support a cause-and-effect relationship. A systematic review and meta-analysis of 15 weight-loss intervention studies that used caloric restriction and/or exercise, but not necessarily vitamin D supplementation or other treatment, found that people who lost weight had a significantly greater increase in serum vitamin D concentrations than those who maintained their weight [208]. The authors commented that the cause of this finding might have been stored vitamin D in body fat and skeletal muscle that was released during weight loss. In another study, 400 International Units (IU)/day vitamin D and 1,000 mg/day calcium supplementation slightly, but significantly, reduced weight gain compared to placebo in postmenopausal women, especially those with a baseline total calcium intake of less than 1,200 mg/day [209]. However, according to a meta-analysis of 12 vitamin D supplementation trials (including 5 in which body composition measurements were primary outcomes), vitamin D supplements without calorie restriction did not affect body weight or fat mass compared to placebo [210]. Overall, the available research suggests that consuming higher amounts of vitamin D or taking vitamin D supplements does not promote weight loss.
Safety

Vitamin D from both foods and dietary supplements is safe at recommended intakes of 600–800 IU/day for adults [56]. Vitamin D toxicity can cause anorexia, weight loss, polyuria, and heart arrhythmias. It can also raise calcium blood levels, which can cause vascular and tissue calcification. The UL for vitamin D is 4,000 IU/day for adults and children 9 age years and older [56].
White Kidney Bean/Bean Pod (Phaseolus vulgaris)

White kidney bean or bean pod (Phaseolus vulgaris) is a legume that is native to Mexico, Central America, and South America and is cultivated worldwide [140]. Phaseolus vulgaris extract is an ingredient in some weight-loss dietary supplements marketed as carbohydrate- or starch-absorption blockers. Laboratory research indicates that Phaseolus vulgaris extract inhibits alpha-amylase activity, so experts have hypothesized that the plant interferes with the breakdown and absorption of carbohydrates in the gastrointestinal tract [16,211-214]. Phaseolus vulgaris might also act as an appetite suppressant [211,215].
Efficacy

The effect of Phaseolus vulgaris on weight loss and body fat has been examined in a few clinical trials, which had inconsistent results. In a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial in Italy, 60 women who were mildly overweight (mean BMI 26) and age 20–45 followed a 2,000–2,200-calorie meal plan and took a tablet containing approximately 445 mg dried aqueous extract of Phaseolus vulgaris (Phase 2 Starch Neutralizer IV) or a placebo once daily before eating a carbohydrate-rich meal [216]. After 30 days, those receiving Phaseolus vulgaris extract lost significantly more weight (mean weight loss 2.93 kg) than those receiving placebo (mean weight loss 0.35 kg). Those in the Phaseolus vulgaris group also experienced a significantly greater reduction in fat mass, adipose tissue thickness, and waist–hip–thigh circumference. However, in a similar trial in the United States in 39 adults with obesity (mostly women, BMI 30–43) age 20–69, those who consumed 1,500 mg Phase 2 starch neutralizer twice daily with lunch and dinner (total daily dose 3,000 mg) for 8 weeks with a high-fiber/low-fat diet did not experience significantly greater weight loss than those receiving a placebo [212].

The authors of a 2011 review of six trials (including the two trials described above) with a total of 247 participants concluded that 445 to 1,500 mg/day Phaseolus vulgaris for 4–13 weeks significantly reduced body fat (mean difference 1.86 kg compared to placebo) but did not significantly affect weight loss [211]. However, the authors noted that the quality of the trials included in their review was poor, making it impossible to draw firm conclusions.

After the publication of that review, a 12-week clinical trial in 123 men and women with overweight or obesity (BMI 25–35) showed that Phaseolus vulgaris modestly yet significantly reduced body weight and body fat [217]. Participants consumed either a placebo or 1,000 mg Phaseolus vulgaris (IQP-PV-101; marketed under the Phase 2, Starchlite, and Phaselite brands) three times per day before meals for a total daily dose of 3,000 mg while following a mildly hypocaloric diet (500 kcal/day less than basal energy needs). Compared to those taking placebo, those receiving Phaseolus vulgaris lost significantly more body weight (mean loss of 2.91 kg vs. 0.92 kg for placebo) and body fat (2.23 kg vs. 0.65 kg for placebo).
Safety

Reported adverse effects for Phaseolus vulgaris are minor and include headaches, soft stools, flatulence, and constipation [211]. No serious adverse effects of Phaseolus vulgaris have been reported in clinical trials, but no trials have lasted longer than 13 weeks.
Yerba Maté (see section on caffeine above)
Yohimbe (Pausinystalia yohimbe)

Yohimbe (Pausinystalia yohimbe, Pausinystalia johimbe) is a West African evergreen tree. The tree’s bark contains several indole alkaloids, including yohimbine, which is the main active constituent of yohimbe [218]. Yohimbine has hyperadrenergic physiological effects because it acts as an alpha-2 receptor antagonist [6,219]. Yohimbe extract is an ingredient in some dietary supplements that are promoted for libido enhancement, body building, and weight loss [218], but it is used primarily as a traditional remedy for sexual dysfunction in men.
Efficacy

Very little research has been conducted on the use of yohimbe for weight loss and/or its effect on body mass. In a small clinical trial, 5 mg yohimbine taken four times/day resulted in greater weight loss (mean weight loss 3.55 kg) than placebo (mean weight loss 2.21 kg) in 20 females with obesity (mean BMI 40 for placebo group and 43 for yohimbine group) who followed a low-energy diet (1,000 kcal/day) for 3 weeks [220]. However, in another clinical trial in 47 men (weighing >20% more than ideal body weight), high-dose yohimbine (peak dose 43 mg/day) for 6 months had no effect on body weight or body fat compared with placebo [221]. The authors of a 2011 review of yohimbe concluded that no conclusive evidence indicates that yohimbe affects body weight or body mass [219]. The author of a 2010 review of yohimbe reached similar conclusions, noting that results from small human trials of yohimbine for weight loss are contradictory and the evidence base is insufficient to support a weight loss claim for this compound [218].
Safety

Yohimbe can be dangerous. Taking 20 to 40 mg of yohimbine has been reported to increase blood pressure slightly, whereas doses of 200 mg or higher can cause headaches, hypertension, anxiety, agitation, tachycardia, myocardial infarction, cardiac failure, and death [43,177,218,219,222]. According to an analysis of calls to the California Poison Control System in 2006, 18% of calls reporting an adverse effect or toxicity potentially caused by dietary supplements involved products containing yohimbe [55]. More recently, dietary supplements containing yohimbe accounted for 1,818 self-reports to U.S. poison control centers between 2000 and 2012 [223]. Of these, 30% caused adverse effects deemed moderate or major, 3.2% required admission to a critical care unit, and one led to a death. Although yohimbe is generally well tolerated at low doses [219], no safe dose has been established for it.

A 2015 analysis determined that only 22% of 49 dietary supplements containing yohimbe or yohimbine listed the quantity of yohimbine on the product label [224]. Many of these amounts were not accurate, and the actual content of yohimbine ranged from 23% to 147% of the labeled amount.

Yohimbe should only be used under medical supervision because of its potential to produce serious adverse effects [225].
Ephedra (Ma Huang), an Ingredient Banned from Dietary Supplements

Ephedra (also known as ma huang), a plant native to China, is the common name for three main species: Ephedra sinica, Ephedra equisentina, and Ephedra intermedia [226]. The active compounds, which are in the plant's stem and account for about 1.32% of the plant’s weight, are the alkaloids ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, norephedrine, and norpseudoephedrine [227,228].

In the 1990s, ephedra—frequently combined with caffeine—was a popular ingredient in dietary supplements sold for weight loss and to enhance athletic performance. FDA no longer permits the use of ephedrine alkaloids in dietary supplements because of safety concerns that are detailed below, but information is provided here in response to continued interest in this ingredient.
Efficacy

Ephedrine acts as a stimulant in the central nervous system [229,230], and it might increase thermogenesis and act as an appetite suppressant [231]. The authors of a meta-analysis that included 20 clinical trials concluded that ephedrine and ephedra are modestly effective for short-term weight loss (6 months or less), but no studies have assessed their long-term effects [232].
Safety

While ephedra was available as a dietary supplement ingredient in the United States, its use with or without caffeine was associated with numerous reported adverse effects, including nausea, vomiting, psychiatric symptoms (such as anxiety and mood change), hypertension, palpitations, stroke, seizures, heart attack, and death [232,233]. Although these reported adverse effects could not be linked with certainty to the use of ephedra-containing dietary supplements, FDA deemed the safety concerns serious enough to prohibit the sale of dietary supplements containing ephedrine alkaloids in 2004 [234]. As a result of this ruling, manufacturers are no longer permitted to sell dietary supplements containing ephedrine alkaloids in the United States.
Safety Considerations

Like all dietary supplements, weight-loss supplements can have side effects and might interact with prescription and over-the-counter medications. In some cases, the active constituents of botanical or other ingredients promoted for weight loss are unknown or uncharacterized [29]. Furthermore, many weight-loss supplements contain multiple ingredients that have not been adequately tested in combination with one another.

Pittler and Ernst noted that for ingredients lacking convincing evidence of effectiveness, "even minor adverse events shift the delicate risk-benefits balance against their use" [6]. People need to talk with their health care providers about the use of weight-loss dietary supplements to understand what is known—and not known—about these products.
Fraudulent and adulterated products

FDA and the FTC warn consumers to beware of fraudulent claims about weight-loss dietary supplements [235,236]. Messages like “lose weight without dieting or exercising” and “to lose weight, all you have to do is take this pill” that sound too good to be true usually are. At best, products with claims like these do not live up to them, and, even worse, they could be dangerous.

Weight-loss products marketed as dietary supplements are sometimes adulterated or tainted with prescription-drug ingredients; controlled substances; or untested/unstudied, pharmaceutically active ingredients that could be harmful [237].

Between January 2004 and December 2012, 237 dietary supplements were subject to a Class I recall by FDA, indicating a reasonable probability that use of or exposure to these products would cause serious adverse health consequences. Of these products, 27% were weight-loss dietary supplements [238]. In most cases, the recall was due to the presence of undeclared drug ingredients. In 2016, FDA issued 36 public notifications warning consumers not to purchase specific weight-loss products because they contained a hidden drug ingredient—often sibutramine, a weight-loss medication that was withdrawn from the U.S. market in 2010 because of safety concerns [237]. A product represented as a dietary supplement that contains one or more drug ingredients, whether or not these ingredients are declared on the label, is considered an unapproved drug and is therefore subject to enforcement action by FDA. FDA maintains a webpage listing public notifications about tainted weight-loss products.
Interactions with medications

Some ingredients in weight-loss dietary supplements can interact with certain medications. For example, glucomannan and guar gum might decrease the absorption of many drugs that are taken orally [147,179]. Glucomannan has been reported to lower blood glucose levels [139] and, therefore, could interact with diabetes medications [147]. Chitosan might potentiate the anticoagulant effects of warfarin [239]. Green tea could interact with chemotherapy drugs [240,241]. Garcinia cambogia was associated with serotonin toxicity in a patient taking the supplement together with two selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor medications [242]. Other ingredients, such as caffeine and bitter orange, could have an additive effect if taken with other stimulants. Bitter orange has also been shown to inhibit CYP3A4 activity, leading to increased blood levels of certain drugs, such as cyclosporine and saquinavir [43].

These are just a few examples of interactions between ingredients of weight-loss dietary supplements and medications. Individuals taking dietary supplements and medications on a regular basis should discuss their use with their health care provider.
Choosing a Sensible Approach to Weight Loss

As this fact sheet shows, the evidence supporting the use of dietary supplements to reduce body weight and stimulate weight loss is inconclusive and unconvincing, and the cost of these products can be considerable [6,14,29,41]. The best way to lose weight and keep it off is to follow a sensible approach that incorporates a healthy eating plan, reduced caloric intake, and moderate physical activity under the guidance of a heath care provider. For some individuals with a high BMI who have additional health risks, physicians may prescribe adjunctive treatments, including FDA-approved prescription medications or bariatric surgery, in addition to lifestyle modifications [7]. Lifestyle changes that promote weight loss might also improve mood and energy levels and lower the risk of heart disease, diabetes, and some cancers [5].

The Weight Management webpage from the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases at the National Institutes of Health provides several helpful publications on weight control, obesity, physical activity, and related nutritional issues.

The federal government's 2020–2025 Dietary Guidelines for Americans notes that "Because foods provide an array of nutrients and other components that have benefits for health, nutritional needs should be met primarily through foods. ... In some cases, fortified foods and dietary supplements are useful when it is not possible otherwise to meet needs for one or more nutrients (e.g., during specific life stages such as pregnancy)."

For more information about building a healthy dietary pattern, refer to the Dietary Guidelines for Americans and the U.S. Department of Agriculture's MyPlate.

The Dietary Guidelines for Americans describes a healthy dietary pattern as one that

    Includes a variety of vegetables; fruits; grains (at least half whole grains); fat-free and low-fat milk, yogurt, and cheese; and oils.
    Includes a variety of protein foods such as lean meats; poultry; eggs; seafood; beans, peas, and lentils; nuts and seeds; and soy products.
    Limits foods and beverages higher in added sugars, saturated fat, and sodium.
    Limits alcoholic beverages.
    Stays within your daily calorie needs.

References

    Flegal KM, Carroll MD, Kit BK, Ogden CL. Prevalence of obesity and trends in the distribution of body mass index among US adults, 1999-2010. JAMA 2012;307:491-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Ogden CL, Carroll MD, Kit BK, Flegal KM. Prevalence of obesity and trends in body mass index among US children and adolescents, 1999-2010. JAMA 2012;307:483-90. [PubMed abstract]
    Lenz TL, Hamilton WR. Supplemental products used for weight loss. J Am Pharm Assoc (2003) 2004;44:59-67. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Department of Agriculture, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Dietary Guidelines for Americans, 2010. 7th ed. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office; 2010.
    National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. Keep Active and Eat Healthy to Improve Well-being and Feel Great. 2018.
    Pittler MH, Ernst E. Dietary supplements for body-weight reduction: a systematic review. Am J Clin Nutr 2004;79:529-36. [PubMed abstract]
    Jensen MD, Ryan DH, Apovian CM, Ard JD, Comuzzie AG, Donato KA, et al. 2013 AHA/ACC/TOS guideline for the management of overweight and obesity in adults: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines and The Obesity Society. Circulation 2014;129:S102-38. [PubMed abstract]
    Blanck HM, Serdula MK, Gillespie C, Galuska DA, Sharpe PA, Conway JM, et al. Use of nonprescription dietary supplements for weight loss is common among Americans. J Am Diet Assoc 2007;107:441-7. [PubMed abstract]
    A race of results. Nutr Bus J 2016;21:1, 3-7.
    Bailey RL, Gahche JJ, Miller PE, Thomas PR, Dwyer JT. Why US adults use dietary supplements. JAMA Intern Med 2013;173:355-61.
    [PubMed abstract]
    Sharpe PA, Granner ML, Conway JM, Ainsworth BE, Dobre M. Availability of weight-loss supplements: Results of an audit of retail outlets in a southeastern city. J Am Diet Assoc 2006;106:2045-51. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. General Accounting Office (now the U.S. Government Accountability Office). Dietary Supplements for Weight Loss: Limited Federal Oversight Has Focused More on Marketing than on Safety. 2002.
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Questions and Answers on Dietary Supplements. 2019.
    Astell KJ, Mathai ML, Su XQ. Plant extracts with appetite suppressing properties for body weight control: a systematic review of double blind randomized controlled clinical trials. Complement Ther Med 2013;21:407-16. [PubMed abstract]
    Allison DB, Fontaine KR, Heshka S, Mentore JL, Heymsfield SB. Alternative treatments for weight loss: a critical review. Crit Rev Food Sci Nutr 2001;41:1-28; discussion 39-40. [PubMed abstract]
    Rios-Hoyo A, Gutierrez-Salmean G. New dietary supplements for obesity: what we currently know. Curr Obes Rep 2016;5:262-70. [PubMed abstract]
    Egras AM, Hamilton WR, Lenz TL, Monaghan MS. An evidence-based review of fat modifying supplemental weight loss products. J Obes 2011;2011. [PubMed abstract]
    Ngondi JL, Etoundi BC, Nyangono CB, Mbofung CM, Oben JE. IGOB131, a novel seed extract of the West African plant Irvingia gabonensis, significantly reduces body weight and improves metabolic parameters in overweight humans in a randomized double-blind placebo controlled investigation. Lipids Health Dis 2009;8:7. [PubMed abstract]
    Onakpoya I, Davies L, Posadzki P, Ernst E. The efficacy of Irvingia gabonensis supplementation in the management of overweight and obesity: a systematic review of randomized controlled trials. J Diet Suppl 2013;10:29-38. [PubMed abstract]
    Kothari SC, Shivarudraiah P, Venkataramaiah SB, Gavara S, Soni MG. Subchronic toxicity and mutagenicity/genotoxicity studies of Irvingia gabonensis extract (IGOB131). Food Chem Toxicol 2012;50:1468-79. [PubMed abstract]
    Ozkan G, Ulusoy S. A case of renal failure developing in association with African mango consumption. Int J Clin Exp Med 2015;8:6374-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Aoe S, Ikenaga T, Noguchi H, Kohashi C, Kakumoto K, Kohda N. Effect of cooked white rice with high beta-glucan barley on appetite and energy intake in healthy Japanese subjects: a randomized controlled trial. Plant Foods Hum Nutr 2014;69:325-30. [PubMed abstract]
    Beck EJ, Tapsell LC, Batterham MJ, Tosh SM, Huang XF. Oat beta-glucan supplementation does not enhance the effectiveness of an energy-restricted diet in overweight women. Br J Nutr 2010;103:1212-22. [PubMed abstract]
    Queenan KM, Stewart ML, Smith KN, Thomas W, Fulcher RG, Slavin JL. Concentrated oat beta-glucan, a fermentable fiber, lowers serum cholesterol in hypercholesterolemic adults in a randomized controlled trial. Nutr J 2007;6:6. [PubMed abstract]
    Haaz S, Fontaine KR, Cutter G, Limdi N, Perumean-Chaney S, Allison DB. Citrus aurantium and synephrine alkaloids in the treatment of overweight and obesity: an update. Obes Rev 2006;7:79-88. [PubMed abstract]
    Seifert JG, Nelson A, Devonish J, Burke ER, Stohs SJ. Effect of acute administration of an herbal preparation on blood pressure and heart rate in humans. Int J Med Sci 2011;8:192-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Stohs SJ, Preuss HG, Shara M. The safety of Citrus aurantium (bitter orange) and its primary protoalkaloid p-synephrine. Phytother Res 2011;25:1421-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Roman MC, Betz JM, Hildreth J. Determination of synephrine in bitter orange raw materials, extracts, and dietary supplements by liquid chromatography with ultraviolet detection: single-laboratory validation. J AOAC Int 2007;90:68-81. [PubMed abstract]
    Dwyer JT, Allison DB, Coates PM. Dietary supplements in weight reduction. J Am Diet Assoc 2005;105:S80-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Stohs SJ, Preuss HG, Shara M. A review of the human clinical studies involving Citrus aurantium (bitter orange) extract and its primary protoalkaloid p-synephrine. Int J Med Sci 2012;9:527-38. [PubMed abstract]
    Colker CM, Kaiman DS, Torina GC, Perlis T, Street C. Effects of Citrus aurantium extract, caffeine, and St. John's Wort on body fat loss, lipid levels, and mood states in overweight healthy adults. Curr Ther Res 1999;60:145-53.
    Bent S, Padula A, Neuhaus J. Safety and efficacy of Citrus aurantium for weight loss. Am J Cardiol 2004;94:1359-61. [PubMed abstract]
    Greenway F, de Jonge-Levitan L, Martin C, Roberts A, Grundy I, Parker C. Dietary herbal supplements with phenylephrine for weight loss. J Med Food 2006;9:572-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Onakpoya I, Davies L, Ernst E. Efficacy of herbal supplements containing Citrus aurantium and synephrine alkaloids for the management of overweight and obesity: a systematic review. Focus Altern Complement Ther 2011;16:254-60.
    Stohs SJ. Assessment of the adverse event reports associated with Citrus aurantium (bitter orange) from April 2004 to October 2009. Journal of Functional Foods 2010;2:235-8.
    Kaats GR, Miller H, Preuss HG, Stohs SJ. A 60day double-blind, placebo-controlled safety study involving Citrus aurantium (bitter orange) extract. Food Chem Toxicol 2013;55:358-62. [PubMed abstract]
    Haller CA, Benowitz NL, Jacob P, 3rd. Hemodynamic effects of ephedra-free weight-loss supplements in humans. Am J Med 2005;118:998-1003. [PubMed abstract]
    Bui LT, Nguyen DT, Ambrose PJ. Blood pressure and heart rate effects following a single dose of bitter orange. Ann Pharmacother 2006;40:53-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Hansen DK, George NI, White GE, Pellicore LS, Abdel-Rahman A, Fabricant D, et al. Physiological effects following administration of Citrus aurantium for 28 days in rats. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 2012;261:236-47. [PubMed abstract]
    Jung YP, Earnest CP, Koozehchian M, Cho M, Barringer N, Walker D, et al. Effects of ingesting a pre-workout dietary supplement with and without synephrine for 8 weeks on training adaptations in resistance-trained males. J Int Soc Sports Nutr 2017;14:1. [PubMed abstract]
    Manore MM. Dietary supplements for improving body composition and reducing body weight: where is the evidence? Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab 2012;22:139-54. [PubMed abstract]
    Yen M, Ewald MB. Toxicity of weight loss agents. J Med Toxicol 2012;8:145-52. [PubMed abstract]
    American Herbal Products Association. Botanical Safety Handbook. 2nd ed. Boca Raton, Florida: CRC Press; 2013.
    Harpaz E, Tamir S, Weinstein A, Weinstein Y. The effect of caffeine on energy balance. J Basic Clin Physiol Pharmacol 2017;28:1-10. [PubMed abstract]
    Astrup A, Toubro S, Cannon S, Hein P, Breum L, Madsen J. Caffeine: a double-blind, placebo-controlled study of its thermogenic, metabolic, and cardiovascular effects in healthy volunteers. Am J Clin Nutr 1990;51:759-67. [PubMed abstract]
    Boozer CN, Daly PA, Homel P, Solomon JL, Blanchard D, Nasser JA, et al. Herbal ephedra/caffeine for weight loss: a 6-month randomized safety and efficacy trial. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord 2002;26:593-604. [PubMed abstract]
    Ohara T, Muroyama K, Yamamoto Y, Murosaki S. Oral intake of a combination of glucosyl hesperidin and caffeine elicits an anti-obesity effect in healthy, moderately obese subjects: a randomized double-blind placebo-controlled trial. Nutr J 2016;15:6. [PubMed abstract]
    Andersen T, Fogh J. Weight loss and delayed gastric emptying following a South American herbal preparation in overweight patients. J Hum Nutr Diet 2001;14:243-50. [PubMed abstract]
    Lopez-Garcia E, van Dam RM, Rajpathak S, Willett WC, Manson JE, Hu FB. Changes in caffeine intake and long-term weight change in men and women. Am J Clin Nutr 2006;83:674-80. [PubMed abstract]
    Icken D, Feller S, Engeli S, Mayr A, Muller A, Hilbert A, et al. Caffeine intake is related to successful weight loss maintenance. Eur J Clin Nutr 2016;70:532-4. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Spilling the Beans: How Much Caffeine is Too Much? 2018.
    EFSA Panel on Dietetic Products, Nutrition and Allergies (NDA). Scientific opinion on the safety of caffeine. EFSA Journal 2015;13:4102-222.
    Torpy JM, Livingston EH. JAMA patient page. Energy drinks. JAMA 2013;309:297. [PubMed abstract]
    Committee on Nutrition and the Council on Sports Medicine and Fitness. Sports drinks and energy drinks for children and adolescents: are they appropriate? Pediatrics 2011;127:1182-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Haller C, Kearney T, Bent S, Ko R, Benowitz N, Olson K. Dietary supplement adverse events: report of a one-year poison center surveillance project. J Med Toxicol 2008;4:84-92. [PubMed abstract]
    Committee to Review Dietary Reference Intakes for Vitamin D and Calcium, Food and Nutrition Board, Institute of Medicine. In: Ross AC, Taylor CL, Yaktine AL, Del Valle HB, eds. Dietary Reference Intakes for Calcium and Vitamin D. Washington (DC); 2011. [PubMed abstract]
    Davies KM, Heaney RP, Recker RR, Lappe JM, Barger-Lux MJ, Rafferty K, et al. Calcium intake and body weight. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2000;85:4635-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Heaney RP. Normalizing calcium intake: projected population effects for body weight. J Nutr 2003;133:268S-70S. [PubMed abstract]
    Parikh SJ, Yanovski JA. Calcium intake and adiposity. Am J Clin Nutr 2003;77:281-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Zemel MB, Shi H, Greer B, Dirienzo D, Zemel PC. Regulation of adiposity by dietary calcium. FASEB J 2000;14:1132-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Villarroel P, Villalobos E, Reyes M, Cifuentes M. Calcium, obesity, and the role of the calcium-sensing receptor. Nutr Rev 2014;72:627-37. [PubMed abstract]
    Christensen R, Lorenzen JK, Svith CR, Bartels EM, Melanson EL, Saris WH, et al. Effect of calcium from dairy and dietary supplements on faecal fat excretion: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Obes Rev 2009;10:475-86. [PubMed abstract]
    Jacobsen R, Lorenzen JK, Toubro S, Krog-Mikkelsen I, Astrup A. Effect of short-term high dietary calcium intake on 24-h energy expenditure, fat oxidation, and fecal fat excretion. Int J Obes (Lond) 2005;29:292-301. [PubMed abstract]
    Heaney RP, Davies KM, Barger-Lux MJ. Calcium and weight: clinical studies. J Am Coll Nutr 2002;21:152S-5S. [PubMed abstract]
    Shi H, Dirienzo D, Zemel MB. Effects of dietary calcium on adipocyte lipid metabolism and body weight regulation in energy-restricted aP2-agouti transgenic mice. FASEB J 2001;15:291-3. [PubMed abstract]
    Zemel MB, Richards J, Mathis S, Milstead A, Gebhardt L, Silva E. Dairy augmentation of total and central fat loss in obese subjects. Int J Obes (Lond) 2005;29:391-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Zemel MB, Thompson W, Milstead A, Morris K, Campbell P. Calcium and dairy acceleration of weight and fat loss during energy restriction in obese adults. Obes Res 2004;12:582-90. [PubMed abstract]
    Soerensen KV, Thorning TK, Astrup A, Kristensen M, Lorenzen JK. Effect of dairy calcium from cheese and milk on fecal fat excretion, blood lipids, and appetite in young men. Am J Clin Nutr 2014;99:984-91. [PubMed abstract]
    Yanovski JA, Parikh SJ, Yanoff LB, Denkinger BI, Calis KA, Reynolds JC, et al. Effects of calcium supplementation on body weight and adiposity in overweight and obese adults: a randomized trial. Ann Intern Med 2009;150:821-9, W145-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Chung M, Balk EM, Brendel M, Ip S, Lau J, Lee J, et al. Vitamin D and calcium: a systematic review of health outcomes. Evid Rep Technol Assess (Full Rep) 2009:1-420. [PubMed abstract]
    Chen M, Pan A, Malik VS, Hu FB. Effects of dairy intake on body weight and fat: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Am J Clin Nutr 2012;96:735-47. [PubMed abstract]
    Trowman R, Dumville JC, Hahn S, Torgerson DJ. A systematic review of the effects of calcium supplementation on body weight. Br J Nutr 2006;95:1033-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Booth AO, Huggins CE, Wattanapenpaiboon N, Nowson CA. Effect of increasing dietary calcium through supplements and dairy food on body weight and body composition: a meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. Br J Nutr 2015;114:1013-25. [PubMed abstract]
    Li P, Fan C, Lu Y, Qi K. Effects of calcium supplementation on body weight: a meta-analysis. Am J Clin Nutr 2016;104:1263-73. [PubMed abstract]
    Curhan GC, Willett WC, Rimm EB, Stampfer MJ. A prospective study of dietary calcium and other nutrients and the risk of symptomatic kidney stones. N Engl J Med 1993;328:833-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Curhan GC, Willett WC, Speizer FE, Spiegelman D, Stampfer MJ. Comparison of dietary calcium with supplemental calcium and other nutrients as factors affecting the risk for kidney stones in women. Ann Intern Med 1997;126:497-504. [PubMed abstract]
    Jackson RD, LaCroix AZ, Gass M, Wallace RB, Robbins J, Lewis CE, et al. Calcium plus vitamin D supplementation and the risk of fractures. N Engl J Med 2006;354:669-83. [PubMed abstract]
    Whiting S, Derbyshire EJ, Tiwari B. Could capsaicinoids help to support weight management? A systematic review and meta-analysis of energy intake data. Appetite 2014;73:183-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Janssens PL, Hursel R, Martens EA, Westerterp-Plantenga MS. Acute effects of capsaicin on energy expenditure and fat oxidation in negative energy balance. PLoS One 2013;8:e67786. [PubMed abstract]
    Janssens PL, Hursel R, Westerterp-Plantenga MS. Capsaicin increases sensation of fullness in energy balance, and decreases desire to eat after dinner in negative energy balance. Appetite 2014;77:44-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Sharma SK, Vij AS, Sharma M. Mechanisms and clinical uses of capsaicin. Eur J Pharmacol 2013;720:55-62. [PubMed abstract]
    van Avesaat M, Troost FJ, Westerterp-Plantenga MS, Helyes Z, Le Roux CW, Dekker J, et al. Capsaicin-induced satiety is associated with gastrointestinal distress but not with the release of satiety hormones. Am J Clin Nutr 2016;103:305-13. [PubMed abstract]
    Urbina SL, Roberts MD, Kephart WC, Villa KB, Santos EN, Olivencia AM, et al. Effects of twelve weeks of capsaicinoid supplementation on body composition, appetite and self-reported caloric intake in overweight individuals. Appetite 2017;113:264-73. [PubMed abstract]
    Reuter SE, Evans AM. Carnitine and acylcarnitines: pharmacokinetic, pharmacological and clinical aspects. Clin Pharmacokinet 2012;51:553-72. [PubMed abstract]
    Pooyandjoo M, Nouhi M, Shab-Bidar S, Djafarian K, Olyaeemanesh A. The effect of (L-)carnitine on weight loss in adults: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Obes Rev 2016;17:970-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Derosa G, Maffioli P, Ferrari I, D'Angelo A, Fogari E, Palumbo I, et al. Orlistat and L-carnitine compared to orlistat alone on insulin resistance in obese diabetic patients. Endocr J 2010;57:777-86. [PubMed abstract]
    Derosa G, Cicero AF, Gaddi A, Mugellini A, Ciccarelli L, Fogari R. The effect of L-carnitine on plasma lipoprotein(a) levels in hypercholesterolemic patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Clin Ther 2003;25:1429-39. [PubMed abstract]
    Preface: Carnitine: Lessons from One Hundred Years of Research. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 2004;1033:ix-xi.
    Villani RG, Gannon J, Self M, Rich PA. L-Carnitine supplementation combined with aerobic training does not promote weight loss in moderately obese women. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab 2000;10:199-207. [PubMed abstract]
    Rebouche CJ. Carnitine. In: Ross AC, Caballero B, Cousins RJ, Tucker KL, Ziegler TR, eds. Modern Nutrition in Health and Disease. 11th ed. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2014:440-6.
    Koeth RA, Levison BS, Culley MK, Buffa JA, Wang Z, Gregory JC, et al. gamma-Butyrobetaine is a proatherogenic intermediate in gut microbial metabolism of L-carnitine to TMAO. Cell Metab 2014;20:799-812. [PubMed abstract]
    Gades MD, Stern JS. Chitosan supplementation and fat absorption in men and women. J Am Diet Assoc 2005;105:72-7.
    [PubMed abstract]
    Schiller R, Barrager E, Schauss A, Nichols E. A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study examining the effects of a rapidly soluble chitosan dietary supplement on weight loss and body composition in overweight and mildly obese individuals. J Am Nutraceutical Assoc 2001;4:42-9.
    Jung EY, Jun SC, Chang UJ, Suh HJ. L-ascorbic acid addition to chitosan reduces body weight in overweight women. Int J Vitam Nutr Res 2014;84:5-11. [PubMed abstract]
    Pittler MH, Abbot NC, Harkness EF, Ernst E. Randomized, double-blind trial of chitosan for body weight reduction. Eur J Clin Nutr 1999;53:379-81. [PubMed abstract]
    Jull AB, Ni Mhurchu C, Bennett DA, Dunshea-Mooij CA, Rodgers A. Chitosan for overweight or obesity. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2008:CD003892.
    Natural Medicines Comprehensive Database. Chitosan. 2013.
    Institute of Medicine, Food and Nutrition Board. Dietary Reference Intakes for Vitamin A, Vitamin K, Arsenic, Boron, Chromium, Copper, Iodine, Iron, Manganese, Molybdenum, Nickel, Silicon, Vanadium, and Zinc. Washington, DC: National Academy Press; 2001. 
    Onakpoya I, Posadzki P, Ernst E. Chromium supplementation in overweight and obesity: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials. Obes Rev 2013;14:496-507. [PubMed abstract]
    Tian H, Guo X, Wang X, He Z, Sun R, Ge S, et al. Chromium picolinate supplementation for overweight or obese adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2013;11:CD010063. [PubMed abstract]
    Anton SD, Morrison CD, Cefalu WT, Martin CK, Coulon S, Geiselman P, et al. Effects of chromium picolinate on food intake and satiety. Diabetes Technol Ther 2008;10:405-12. [PubMed abstract]
    Pittler MH, Stevinson C, Ernst E. Chromium picolinate for reducing body weight: meta-analysis of randomized trials. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord 2003;27:522-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Astell KJ, Mathai ML, Su XQ. A review on botanical species and chemical compounds with appetite suppressing properties for body weight control. Plant Foods Hum Nutr 2013;68:213-21. [PubMed abstract]
    Godard MP, Johnson BA, Richmond SR. Body composition and hormonal adaptations associated with forskolin consumption in overweight and obese men. Obes Res 2005;13:1335-43. [PubMed abstract]
    Shivaprasad HN, Gopalakrishna S, Mariyanna B, Thekkoot M, Reddy R, Tippeswamy BS. Effect of Coleus forskohlii extract on cafeteria diet-induced obesity in rats. Pharmacognosy Res 2014;6:42-5. [PubMed abstract]
    Henderson S, Magu B, Rasmussen C, Lancaster S, Kerksick C, Smith P, et al. Effects of Coleus forskohlii supplementation on body composition and hematological profiles in mildly overweight women. J Int Soc Sports Nutr 2005;2:54-62. [PubMed abstract]
    Loftus HL, Astell KJ, Mathai ML, Su XQ. Coleus forskohlii extract supplementation in conjunction with a hypocaloric diet reduces the risk factors of metabolic syndrome in overweight and obese subjects: a randomized controlled trial. Nutrients 2015;7:9508-22. [PubMed abstract]
    Virgona N, Taki Y, Yamada S, Umegaki K. Dietary Coleus forskohlii extract generates dose-related hepatotoxicity in mice. J Appl Toxicol 2013;33:924-32. [PubMed abstract]
    Gaullier JM, Halse J, Hoye K, Kristiansen K, Fagertun H, Vik H, et al. Conjugated linoleic acid supplementation for 1 y reduces body fat mass in healthy overweight humans. Am J Clin Nutr 2004;79:1118-25. [PubMed abstract]
    Lehnen TE, da Silva MR, Camacho A, Marcadenti A, Lehnen AM. A review on effects of conjugated linoleic fatty acid (CLA) upon body composition and energetic metabolism. J Int Soc Sports Nutr 2015;12:36. [PubMed abstract]
    Onakpoya IJ, Posadzki PP, Watson LK, Davies LA, Ernst E. The efficacy of long-term conjugated linoleic acid (CLA) supplementation on body composition in overweight and obese individuals: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials. Eur J Nutr 2012;51:127-34. [PubMed abstract]
    Norris LE, Collene AL, Asp ML, Hsu JC, Liu LF, Richardson JR, et al. Comparison of dietary conjugated linoleic acid with safflower oil on body composition in obese postmenopausal women with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Am J Clin Nutr 2009;90:468-76. [PubMed abstract]
    Chen SC, Lin YH, Huang HP, Hsu WL, Houng JY, Huang CK. Effect of conjugated linoleic acid supplementation on weight loss and body fat composition in a Chinese population. Nutrition 2012;28:559-65. [PubMed abstract]
    Ribeiro AS, Pina FL, Dodero SR, Silva DR, Schoenfeld BJ, Sugihara Junior P, et al. Effect of conjugated linoleic acid associated with aerobic exercise on body fat and lipid profile in obese women: a randomized, double-blinded, and placebo-controlled trial. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab 2016;26:135-44. [PubMed abstract]
    Gaullier JM, Halse J, Hoye K, Kristiansen K, Fagertun H, Vik H, et al. Supplementation with conjugated linoleic acid for 24 months is well tolerated by and reduces body fat mass in healthy, overweight humans. J Nutr 2005;135:778-84. [PubMed abstract]
    Steck SE, Chalecki AM, Miller P, Conway J, Austin GL, Hardin JW, et al. Conjugated linoleic acid supplementation for twelve weeks increases lean body mass in obese humans. J Nutr 2007;137:1188-93. [PubMed abstract]
    Kim JH, Kim Y, Kim YJ, Park Y. Conjugated Linoleic Acid: Potential Health Benefits as a Functional Food Ingredient. Annu Rev Food Sci Technol 2016;7:221-44. [PubMed abstract]
    Bilal M, Patel Y, Burkitt M, Babich M. Linoleic acid induced acute hepatitis: a case report and review of the literature. Case Reports Hepatol 2015;2015:807354. [PubMed abstract]
    Nortadas R, Barata J. Fulminant hepatitis during self-medication with conjugated linoleic acid. Ann Hepatol 2012;11:265-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Ramos R, Mascarenhas J, Duarte P, Vicente C, Casteleiro C. Conjugated linoleic acid-induced toxic hepatitis: first case report. Dig Dis Sci 2009;54:1141-3. [PubMed abstract]
    Salas-Salvado J, Marquez-Sandoval F, Bullo M. Conjugated linoleic acid intake in humans: a systematic review focusing on its effect on body composition, glucose, and lipid metabolism. Crit Rev Food Sci Nutr 2006;46:479-88. [PubMed abstract]
    Terpstra AH. Effect of conjugated linoleic acid on body composition and plasma lipids in humans: an overview of the literature. Am J Clin Nutr 2004;79:352-61. [PubMed abstract]
    Silveira MB, Carraro R, Monereo S, Tebar J. Conjugated linoleic acid (CLA) and obesity. Public Health Nutr 2007;10:1181-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Riserus U, Arner P, Brismar K, Vessby B. Treatment with dietary trans10cis12 conjugated linoleic acid causes isomer-specific insulin resistance in obese men with the metabolic syndrome. Diabetes Care 2002;25:1516-21. [PubMed abstract]
    Jeukendrup AE, Randell R. Fat burners: nutrition supplements that increase fat metabolism. Obes Rev 2011;12:841-51. [PubMed abstract]
    Peng J, Yuan JP, Wu CF, Wang JH. Fucoxanthin, a marine carotenoid present in brown seaweeds and diatoms: metabolism and bioactivities relevant to human health. Mar Drugs 2011;9:1806-28. [PubMed abstract]
    Abidov M, Ramazanov Z, Seifulla R, Grachev S. The effects of Xanthigen in the weight management of obese premenopausal women with non-alcoholic fatty liver disease and normal liver fat. Diabetes Obes Metab 2010;12:72-81. [PubMed abstract]
    Marquez F, Babio N, Bullo M, Salas-Salvado J. Evaluation of the safety and efficacy of hydroxycitric acid or Garcinia cambogia extracts in humans. Crit Rev Food Sci Nutr 2012;52:585-94. [PubMed abstract]
    Saper RB, Eisenberg DM, Phillips RS. Common dietary supplements for weight loss. Am Fam Physician 2004;70:1731-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Onakpoya I, Hung SK, Perry R, Wider B, Ernst E. The use of garcinia extract (hydroxycitric acid) as a weight loss supplement: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised clinical trials. J Obes 2011;2011:509038. [PubMed abstract]
    Mattes RD, Bormann L. Effects of (-)-hydroxycitric acid on appetitive variables. Physiol Behav 2000;71:87-94. [PubMed abstract]
    Heymsfield SB, Allison DB, Vasselli JR, Pietrobelli A, Greenfield D, Nunez C. Garcinia cambogia (hydroxycitric acid) as a potential antiobesity agent: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 1998;280:1596-600. [PubMed abstract]
    Chuah LO, Ho WY, Beh BK, Yeap SK. Updates on antiobesity effect of Garcinia Origin (-)-HCA. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med 2013;2013:751658. [PubMed abstract]
    Hendrickson BP, Shaikh N, Occhiogrosso M, Penzner JB. Mania induced by Garcinia cambogia: a case series. Prim Care Companion CNS Disord 2016;18. [PubMed abstract]
    Lunsford KE, Bodzin AS, Reino DC, Wang HL, Busuttil RW. Dangerous dietary supplements: Garcinia cambogia-associated hepatic failure requiring transplantation. World J Gastroenterol 2016;22:10071-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Melendez-Rosado J, Snipelisky D, Matcha G, Stancampiano F. Acute hepatitis induced by pure Garcinia cambogia. J Clin Gastroenterol 2015;49:449-50. [PubMed abstract]
    Corey R, Werner KT, Singer A, Moss A, Smith M, Noelting J, et al. Acute liver failure associated with Garcinia cambogia use. Ann Hepatol 2016;15:123-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Henry DA, Mitchell AS, Aylward J, Fung MT, McEwen J, Rohan A. Glucomannan and risk of oesophageal obstruction. Br Med J (Clin Res Ed) 1986;292:591-2. [PubMed abstract]
    Sood N, Baker WL, Coleman CI. Effect of glucomannan on plasma lipid and glucose concentrations, body weight, and blood pressure: systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Clin Nutr 2008;88:1167-75. [PubMed abstract]
    Vido L, Facchin P, Antonello I, Gobber D, Rigon F. Childhood obesity treatment: double blinded trial on dietary fibres (glucomannan) versus placebo. Padiatr Padol 1993;28:133-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Walsh DE, Yaghoubian V, Behforooz A. Effect of glucomannan on obese patients: a clinical study. Int J Obes 1984;8:289-93. [PubMed abstract]
    Arvill A, Bodin L. Effect of short-term ingestion of konjac glucomannan on serum cholesterol in healthy men. Am J Clin Nutr 1995;61:585-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Keithley JK, Swanson B, Mikolaitis SL, DeMeo M, Zeller JM, Fogg L, et al. Safety and efficacy of glucomannan for weight loss in overweight and moderately obese adults. J Obes 2013;2013:610908. [PubMed abstract]
    Zalewski BM, Chmielewska A, Szajewska H. The effect of glucomannan on body weight in overweight or obese children and adults: A systematic review of randomized controlled trials. Nutrition 2015 31:437-442. [PubMed abstract]
    Zalewski BM, Chmielewska A, Szajewska H, Keithley JK, Li P, Goldsby TU, Allison DB. Correction of data errors and reanalysis of "The effect of glucomannan on body weight in overweight or obese children and adults: A systematic review of randomized controlled trials". Nutrition 2015;31:1056-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Onakpoya I, Posadzki P, Ernst E. The efficacy of glucomannan supplementation in overweight and obesity: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials. J Am Coll Nutr 2014;33:70-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Natural Medicines Comprehensive Database. Glucomannan. 2011.
    Farah A, Monteiro M, Donangelo CM, Lafay S. Chlorogenic acids from green coffee extract are highly bioavailable in humans. J Nutr 2008;138:2309-15. [PubMed abstract]
    Choi BK, Park SB, Lee DR, Lee HJ, Jin YY, Yang SH, et al. Green coffee bean extract improves obesity by decreasing body fat in high-fat diet-induced obese mice. Asian Pac J Trop Med 2016;9:635-43. [PubMed abstract]
    Song SJ, Choi S, Park T. Decaffeinated green coffee bean extract attenuates diet-induced obesity and insulin resistance in mice. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med 2014;2014:718379. [PubMed abstract]
    Onakpoya I, Terry R, Ernst E. The use of green coffee extract as a weight loss supplement: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised clinical trials. Gastroenterol Res Pract 2011;2011. [PubMed abstract]
    Natural Medicines Comprehensive Database. Green Coffee. 2012.
    Vinson JA, Burnham BR, Nagendran MV. Randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, linear dose, crossover study to evaluate the efficacy and safety of a green coffee bean extract in overweight subjects. Diabetes Metab Syndr Obes 2012;5:21-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Federal Trade Commission. FTC Charges Green Coffee Bean Sellers with Deceiving Consumers through Fake News Sites and Bogus Weigh Loss Claims. Federal Trade Commission, 2014. 
    United States District Court Middle District of Florida, Tampa Division. Case 8:14-cv-01155-SDM-TGW. 2014.
    Grove KA, Lambert JD. Laboratory, epidemiological, and human intervention studies show that tea (Camellia sinensis) may be useful in the prevention of obesity. J Nutr 2010;140:446-53. [PubMed abstract]
    Hursel R, Westerterp-Plantenga MS. Catechin- and caffeine-rich teas for control of body weight in humans. Am J Clin Nutr 2013;98:1682S-93S. [PubMed abstract]
    Rains TM, Agarwal S, Maki KC. Antiobesity effects of green tea catechins: a mechanistic review. J Nutr Biochem 2011;22:1-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Janssens PL, Hursel R, Westerterp-Plantenga MS. Nutraceuticals for body-weight management: The role of green tea catechins. Physiol Behav 2016;162:83-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Turkozu D, Tek NA. A minireview of effects of green tea on energy expenditure. Crit Rev Food Sci Nutr 2017;57:254-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Lochocka K, Bajerska J, Glapa A, Fidler-Witon E, Nowak JK, Szczapa T, et al. Green tea extract decreases starch digestion and absorption from a test meal in humans: a randomized, placebo-controlled crossover study. Sci Rep 2015;5:12015. [PubMed abstract]
    Lonac MC, Richards JC, Schweder MM, Johnson TK, Bell C. Influence of short-term consumption of the caffeine-free, epigallocatechin-3-gallate supplement, Teavigo, on resting metabolism and the thermic effect of feeding. Obesity (Silver Spring) 2011;19:298-304. [PubMed abstract]
    Mielgo-Ayuso J, Barrenechea L, Alcorta P, Larrarte E, Margareto J, Labayen I. Effects of dietary supplementation with epigallocatechin-3-gallate on weight loss, energy homeostasis, cardiometabolic risk factors and liver function in obese women: randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial. Br J Nutr 2014;111:1263-71. [PubMed abstract]
    Jurgens TM, Whelan AM, Killian L, Doucette S, Kirk S, Foy E. Green tea for weight loss and weight maintenance in overweight or obese adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2012;12:CD008650. [PubMed abstract]
    Phung OJ, Baker WL, Matthews LJ, Lanosa M, Thorne A, Coleman CI. Effect of green tea catechins with or without caffeine on anthropometric measures: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Clin Nutr 2010;91:73-81. [PubMed abstract]
    Dostal AM, Samavat H, Espejo L, Arikawa AY, Stendell-Hollis NR, Kurzer MS. Green tea extract and catechol-O-methyltransferase genotype modify fasting serum insulin and plasma adiponectin concentrations in a randomized controlled trial of overweight and obese postmenopausal women. J Nutr 2016;146:38-45. [PubMed abstract]
    Hursel R, Viechtbauer W, Westerterp-Plantenga MS. The effects of green tea on weight loss and weight maintenance: a meta-analysis. Int J Obes (Lond) 2009;33:956-61. [PubMed abstract]
    EFSA Panel on Dietetic Products, Nutrition and Allergies (NDA). Scientific opinion on the substantiation of health claims related to Camellia sinensis (L.) kuntze (tea), including catechins from green tea, and contribution to the maintenance or achievement of a normal body weight (ID 1107, 1112, 1544, 2716), increased beta-oxidation of fatty acids leading to a reduction in body fat mass (ID 1123, 1124, 3698), and maintenance of normal blood glucose concentrations (ID 1115, 1545) pursuant to Article 13(1) of Regulation (EC) No 1924/2006. EFSA Journal 2010;8:1791-812.
    National Toxicology Program, National Institutes of Health. NTP technical report on the toxicology studies of green tea extract in F344/ntac rats and B6C3F1/N mice and toxicology and carcinogenesis studies of green tea extract in Wistar Han [Crl:WI(Han)] rats and B6C3F1/N mice (gavage studies). 2016.
    Yu Z, Samavat H, Dostal AM, Wang R, Torkelson CJ, Yang CS, et al. Effect of green tea supplements on liver enzyme elevation: results from a randomized intervention study in the United States. Cancer Prev Res (Phila) 2017;10:571-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Frank J, George TW, Lodge JK, Rodriguez-Mateos AM, Spencer JP, Minihane AM, et al. Daily consumption of an aqueous green tea extract supplement does not impair liver function or alter cardiovascular disease risk biomarkers in healthy men. J Nutr 2009;139:58-62. [PubMed abstract]
    Navarro VJ, Khan I, Bjornsson E, Seeff LB, Serrano J, Hoofnagle JH. Liver injury from herbal and dietary supplements. Hepatology 2017;65:363-73. [PubMed abstract]
    Sarma DN, Barrett ML, Chavez ML, Gardiner P, Ko R, Mahady GB, et al. Safety of green tea extracts : a systematic review by the US Pharmacopeia. Drug Saf 2008;31:469-84. [PubMed abstract]
    Pittler MH, Ernst E. Guar gum for body weight reduction: meta-analysis of randomized trials. Am J Med 2001;110:724-30. [PubMed abstract]
    Rao TP. Role of guar fiber in appetite control. Physiol Behav 2016;164:277-83. [PubMed abstract]
    Dall'Alba V, Silva FM, Antonio JP, Steemburgo T, Royer CP, Almeida JC, et al. Improvement of the metabolic syndrome profile by soluble fibre - guar gum - in patients with type 2 diabetes: a randomised clinical trial. Br J Nutr 2013;110:1601-10. [PubMed abstract]
    Pittler MH, Schmidt K, Ernst E. Adverse events of herbal food supplements for body weight reduction: systematic review. Obes Rev 2005;6:93-111. [PubMed abstract]
    Lewis JH. Esophageal and small bowel obstruction from guar gum-containing "diet pills": analysis of 26 cases reported to the Food and Drug Administration. Am J Gastroenterol 1992;87:1424-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Natural Medicines Comprehensive Database. Guar Gum. 2011.
    van Heerden FR, Marthinus Horak R, Maharaj VJ, Vleggaar R, Senabe JV, Gunning PJ. An appetite suppressant from Hoodia species. Phytochemistry 2007;68:2545-53. [PubMed abstract]
    MacLean DB, Luo LG. Increased ATP content/production in the hypothalamus may be a signal for energy-sensing of satiety: studies of the anorectic mechanism of a plant steroidal glycoside. Brain Res 2004;1020:1-11. [PubMed abstract]
    Smith C, Krygsman A. Hoodia gordonii: to eat, or not to eat. J Ethnopharmacol 2014;155:987-91. [PubMed abstract]
    Whelan AM, Jurgens TM, Szeto V. Case report. Efficacy of hoodia for weight loss: is there evidence to support the efficacy claims? J Clin Pharm Ther 2010;35:609-12. [PubMed abstract]
    Blom WA, Abrahamse SL, Bradford R, Duchateau GS, Theis W, Orsi A, et al. Effects of 15-d repeated consumption of Hoodia gordonii purified extract on safety, ad libitum energy intake, and body weight in healthy, overweight women: a randomized controlled trial. Am J Clin Nutr 2011;94:1171-81. [PubMed abstract]
    National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine, National Institutes of Health. Herbs at a Glance: Hoodia. 2012.
    Lee RA, Balick MJ. Indigenous use of Hoodia gordonii and appetite suppression. Explore (NY) 2007;3:404-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Sender R, Fuchs S, Milo R. Revised Estimates for the Number of Human and Bacteria Cells in the Body. PLoS Biol 2016;14:e1002533. [PubMed abstract]
    Moran CP, Shanahan F. Gut microbiota and obesity: role in aetiology and potential therapeutic target. Best Pract Res Clin Gastroenterol 2014;28:585-97. [PubMed abstract]
    Davis CD. The gut microbiome and its role in obesity. Nutr Today 2016;51:167-74. [PubMed abstract]
    Park DY, Ahn YT, Park SH, Huh CS, Yoo SR, Yu R, et al. Supplementation of Lactobacillus curvatus HY7601 and Lactobacillus plantarum KY1032 in diet-induced obese mice is associated with gut microbial changes and reduction in obesity. PLoS One 2013;8:e59470. [PubMed abstract]
    Kadooka Y, Sato M, Ogawa A, Miyoshi M, Uenishi H, Ogawa H, et al. Effect of Lactobacillus gasseri SBT2055 in fermented milk on abdominal adiposity in adults in a randomised controlled trial. Br J Nutr 2013;110:1696-703. [PubMed abstract]
    Sanchez M, Darimont C, Drapeau V, Emady-Azar S, Lepage M, Rezzonico E, et al. Effect of Lactobacillus rhamnosus CGMCC1.3724 supplementation on weight loss and maintenance in obese men and women. Br J Nutr 2014;111:1507-19. [PubMed abstract]
    Crovesy L, Ostrowski M, Ferreira D, Rosado EL, Soares-Mota M. Effect of Lactobacillus on body weight and body fat in overweight subjects: a systematic review of randomized controlled clinical trials. Int J Obes (Lond) 2017;41:1607-14. [PubMed abstract]
    Borgeraas H, Johnson LK, Skattebu J, Hertel JK, Hjelmesaeth J. Effects of probiotics on body weight, body mass index, fat mass and fat percentage in subjects with overweight or obesity: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Obes Rev 2018;19:219-32. [PubMed abstract]
    Suzumura EA, Bersch-Ferreira AC, Torreglosa CR, da Silva JT, Coqueiro AY, Kuntz MGF, et al. Effects of oral supplementation with probiotics or synbiotics in overweight and obese adults: a systematic review and meta-analyses of randomized trials. Nutr Rev 2019. [PubMed abstract]
    Dror T, Dickstein Y, Dubourg G, Paul M. Microbiota manipulation for weight change. Microb Pathog 2017;106:146-61. [PubMed abstract]
    World Gastroenterology Organisation. Probiotics and prebiotics . 2017.
    Didari T, Solki S, Mozaffari S, Nikfar S, Abdollahi M. A systematic review of the safety of probiotics. Expert Opin Drug Saf 2014;13:227-39. [PubMed abstract]
    Borriello SP, Hammes WP, Holzapfel W, Marteau P, Schrezenmeir J, Vaara M, et al. Safety of probiotics that contain lactobacilli or bifidobacteria. Clin Infect Dis 2003;36:775-80. [PubMed abstract]
    Kalman D, Colker CM, Wilets I, Roufs JB, Antonio J. The effects of pyruvate supplementation on body composition in overweight individuals. Nutrition 1999;15:337-40. [PubMed abstract]
    Onakpoya I, Hunt K, Wider B, Ernst E. Pyruvate supplementation for weight loss: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials. Crit Rev Food Sci Nutr 2014;54:17-23. [PubMed abstract]
    Koh-Banerjee PK, Ferreira MP, Greenwood M, Bowden RG, Cowan PN, Almada AL, et al. Effects of calcium pyruvate supplementation during training on body composition, exercise capacity, and metabolic responses to exercise. Nutrition 2005;21:312-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Stanko RT, Tietze DL, Arch JE. Body composition, energy utilization, and nitrogen metabolism with a 4.25-MJ/d low-energy diet supplemented with pyruvate. Am J Clin Nutr 1992;56:630-5. [PubMed abstract]
    Bredsdorff L, Wedebye EB, Nikolov NG, Hallas-Moller T, Pilegaard K. Raspberry ketone in food supplements--High intake, few toxicity data--A cause for safety concern? Regul Toxicol Pharmacol 2015;73:196-200. [PubMed abstract]
    Cotten BM, Diamond SA, Banh T, Hsiao YH, Cole RM, Li J, et al. Raspberry ketone fails to reduce adiposity beyond decreasing food intake in C57BL/6 mice fed a high-fat diet. Food Funct 2017;8:1512-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Lopez HL, Ziegenfuss TN, Hofheins JE, Habowski SM, Arent SM, Weir JP, et al. Eight weeks of supplementation with a multi-ingredient weight loss product enhances body composition, reduces hip and waist girth, and increases energy levels in overweight men and women. J Int Soc Sports Nutr 2013;10:22. [PubMed abstract]
    Earthman CP, Beckman LM, Masodkar K, Sibley SD. The link between obesity and low circulating 25-hydroxyvitamin D concentrations: considerations and implications. Int J Obes (Lond) 2012;36:387-96. [PubMed abstract]
    Mallard SR, Howe AS, Houghton LA. Vitamin D status and weight loss: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized and nonrandomized controlled weight-loss trials. Am J Clin Nutr 2016;104:1151-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Caan B, Neuhouser M, Aragaki A, Lewis CB, Jackson R, LeBoff MS, et al. Calcium plus vitamin D supplementation and the risk of postmenopausal weight gain. Arch Intern Med 2007;167:893-902. [PubMed abstract]
    Pathak K, Soares MJ, Calton EK, Zhao Y, Hallett J. Vitamin D supplementation and body weight status: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Obes Rev 2014;15:528-37. [PubMed abstract]
    Onakpoya I, Aldaas S, Terry R, Ernst E. The efficacy of Phaseolus vulgaris as a weight-loss supplement: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised clinical trials. Br J Nutr 2011;106:196-202. [PubMed abstract]
    Udani J, Hardy M, Madsen DC. Blocking carbohydrate absorption and weight loss: a clinical trial using Phase 2 brand proprietary fractionated white bean extract. Altern Med Rev 2004;9:63-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Obiro WC, Zhang T, Jiang B. The nutraceutical role of the Phaseolus vulgaris alpha-amylase inhibitor. Br J Nutr 2008;100:1-12. [PubMed abstract]
    Fu C, Jiang Y, Guo J, Su Z. Natural products with anti-obesity effects and different mechanisms of action. J Agric Food Chem 2016;64:9571-85. [PubMed abstract]
    Spadafranca A, Rinelli S, Riva A, Morazzoni P, Magni P, Bertoli S, et al. Phaseolus vulgaris extract affects glycometabolic and appetite control in healthy human subjects. Br J Nutr 2013;109:1789-95. [PubMed abstract]
    Celleno L, Tolaini MV, D'Amore A, Perricone NV, Preuss HG. A dietary supplement containing standardized Phaseolus vulgaris extract influences body composition of overweight men and women. Int J Med Sci 2007;4:45-52. [PubMed abstract]
    Grube B, Chong WF, Chong PW, Riede L. Weight reduction and maintenance with IQP-PV-101: a 12-week randomized controlled study with a 24-week open label period. Obesity 2014;22:645-51. [PubMed abstract]
    Betz JM. Yohimbe. In: Coates PM, Betz JM, Blackman MR, et al., eds. Encyclopedia of Dietary Supplements. 2nd ed. London and New York: Informa Healthcare; 2010:861-8.
    Cimolai N, Cimolai T. Yohimbine use for physical enhancement and its potential toxicity. J Diet Suppl 2011;8:346-54. [PubMed abstract]
    Kucio C, Jonderko K, Piskorska D. Does yohimbine act as a slimming drug? Isr J Med Sci 1991;27:550-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Sax L. Yohimbine does not affect fat distribution in men. Int J Obes 1991;15:561-5. [PubMed abstract]
    National Institutes of Health, National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine. Herbs at a Glance: Yohimbe. 2012.
    Rao N, Spiller HA, Hodges NL, Chounthirath T, Casavant MJ, Kamboj AK, et al. An increase in dietary supplement exposures reported to US poison control centers. J Med Toxicol 2017. [PubMed abstract]
    Cohen PA, Wang YH, Maller G, DeSouza R, Khan IA. Pharmaceutical quantities of yohimbine found in dietary supplements in the USA. Drug Test Anal 2016;8:357-69. [PubMed abstract]
    Natural Medicines Comprehensive Database. Yohimbe. 2012.
    Hu SY. Ephedra (ma-huang) in the new Chinese materia medica. Econ Bot 1969;23:346-51.
    Karch SB, Stephens BG. Toxicology and pathology of deaths related to methadone: retrospective review. West J Med 2000;172:11-4.
    [PubMed abstract]
    Leung AY, Foster S. Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used in Foods, Drugs, and Cosmetics. New York: John Wiley; 1996.
    Burnhanm TH, Novak KK, Bell WI, eds. Drug Facts and Comparisons. 57th ed. St. Louis, Missouri: Facts and Comparisons; 2003.
    Hardman JG, Limbird LE, Gilman A, eds. Goodman and Gilman's The Pharmacological Basis of Disease. New York: McGraw-Hill; 2001.
    Astrup A, Toubro S, Christensen NJ, Quaade F. Pharmacology of thermogenic drugs. Am J Clin Nutr 1992;55:246S-8S.
    [PubMed abstract]
    Shekelle PG, Hardy ML, Morton SC, Maglione M, Mojica WA, Suttorp MJ, et al. Efficacy and safety of ephedra and ephedrine for weight loss and athletic performance: a meta-analysis. JAMA 2003;289:1537-45. [PubMed abstract]
    Haller CA, Benowitz NL. Adverse cardiovascular and central nervous system events associated with dietary supplements containing ephedra alkaloids. N Engl J Med 2000;343:1833-8. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Final Rule Declaring Dietary Supplements Containing Ephedrine Alkaloids Adulterated Because They Present an Unreasonable Risk. 2004.
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration.Beware of Products Promising Miracle Weight Loss. 2014.
    Federal Trade Commission. The Truth Behind Weight Loss Ads. 2019.
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Tainted Weight Loss Products. 2017.
    Harel Z, Harel S, Wald R, Mamdani M, Bell CM. The frequency and characteristics of dietary supplement recalls in the United States. JAMA Intern Med 2013;173:926-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Huang SS, Sung SH, Chiang CE. Chitosan potentiation of warfarin effect. Ann Pharmacother 2007;41:1912-4. [PubMed abstract]
    Natural Medicines Comprehensive Database. Green Tea. 2014.
    Shin SC, Choi JS. Effects of epigallocatechin gallate on the oral bioavailability and pharmacokinetics of tamoxifen and its main metabolite, 4-hydroxytamoxifen, in rats. Anticancer Drugs 2009;20:584-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Lopez AM, Kornegay J, Hendrickson RG. Serotonin toxicity associated with Garcinia cambogia over-the-counter supplement. J Med Toxicol 2014;10:399-401. [PubMed abstract]

Disclaimer

This fact sheet by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Office of Dietary Supplements (ODS) provides information that should not take the place of medical advice. We encourage you to talk to your health care providers (doctor, registered dietitian, pharmacist, etc.) about your interest in, questions about, or use of dietary supplements and what may be best for your overall health. Any mention in this publication of a specific product or service, or recommendation from an organization or professional society, does not represent an endorsement by ODS of that product, service, or expert advice.

Updated: May 18, 2022


 Zinc: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals (original version)
Zinc: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals
Table of Contents

    Introduction
    Recommended Intakes
    Sources of Zinc
    Zinc Intakes and Status
    Zinc Deficiency
    Groups at Risk of Zinc Inadequacy
    Zinc and Health
    Health Risks from Excessive Zinc
    Interactions with Medications
    Zinc and Healthful Diets
    References
    Disclaimer

Introduction

Zinc, an essential mineral, is naturally present in some foods, added to others, and available as a dietary supplement. Zinc is also found in some cold lozenges, over-the-counter drugs sold as cold remedies, and some denture adhesive creams.

Zinc is involved in many aspects of cellular metabolism. It is required for the catalytic activity of hundreds of enzymes, and it plays a role in enhancing immune function, protein and DNA synthesis, wound healing, and cell signaling and division [1-4]. Zinc also supports healthy growth and development during pregnancy, infancy, childhood, and adolescence and is involved in the sense of taste [2,3,5].

The total amount of zinc in the body is approximately 1.5 grams (g) in women and 2.5 g in men [2]. Most of this zinc is stored in skeletal muscle and bone [1-3].

Zinc homeostasis is maintained through absorption of zinc from the diet, excretion into the gastrointestinal tract, and reabsorption in the gastrointestinal lumen [2,3]. In general, as zinc intakes rise, the amount of zinc absorbed also increases, but its fractional absorption drops [2,3].
Assessing zinc status

Serum or plasma zinc concentrations are often used to assess zinc status, and concentrations in healthy people typically range from 80 to 120 mcg/dL. However, these measures have important limitations. For example, zinc concentrations in serum can be affected by age, sex, and time of day, and they do not always correlate with dietary or supplemental zinc intakes.

Serum or plasma zinc concentrations are typically used in clinical practice to assess zinc status. In healthy people, the amount of zinc in serum or plasma is 80 to 120 micrograms/deciliter (mcg/dL) (12 to 18 micromoles/liter [mcmol/L]) [2]. Serum zinc concentrations below 70 mcg/dL in women and 74 mcg/dL in men indicate inadequate zinc status. However, both serum and plasma measures have important limitations. Zinc concentrations in serum are associated with the patient’s sex and age as well as the time of the blood draw (morning vs. evening) and do not always correlate with dietary or supplemental zinc intakes [6]. Zinc concentrations also fluctuate in response to other factors, including infections, changes in steroid hormones, and muscle catabolism during weight loss or illness [1,3]. When assessing a patient's zinc status, clinicians also consider risk factors for zinc deficiency, such as inadequate caloric intake, chronic alcohol use, and malabsorptive digestive diseases, as well as signs of zinc deficiency, such as impaired growth in infants and children [1].
Recommended Intakes

The Food and Nutrition Board at the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine has established Recommended Dietary Allowances and Adequate Intakes for zinc. These values range from 8 to 12 mg for adults and from 2 to 13 mg for infants, children, and adolescents, depending on age, sex, and life stage.

Intake recommendations for zinc and other nutrients are provided in the Dietary Reference Intakes (DRIs) developed by the Food and Nutrition Board (FNB) at the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine [1]. DRI is the general term for a set of reference values used for planning and assessing nutrient intakes of healthy people. These values include the following:

    Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA): Average daily level of intake sufficient to meet the nutrient requirements of nearly all (97%–98%) healthy individuals; often used to plan nutritionally adequate diets for individuals
    Adequate Intake (AI): Intake at this level is assumed to ensure nutritional adequacy; established when evidence is insufficient to develop an RDA
    Estimated Average Requirement (EAR): Average daily level of intake estimated to meet the requirements of 50% of healthy individuals; usually used to assess the nutrient intakes of groups of people and to plan nutritionally adequate diets for them; can also be used to assess the nutrient intakes of individuals
    Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL): Maximum daily intake unlikely to cause adverse health effects

Table 1 lists the current zinc RDAs. For infants from birth to 6 months, the FNB established an AI for zinc that is equivalent to the mean intake of zinc in healthy, breastfed infants.
Table 1: Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDAs) for Zinc in Milligrams (mg) [1] Age 	Male 	Female 	Pregnancy 	Lactation
0–6 months* 	2 mg 	2 mg 		
7–12 months 	3 mg 	3 mg 		
1–3 years 	3 mg 	3 mg 		
4–8 years 	5 mg 	5 mg 		
9–13 years 	8 mg 	8 mg 		
14–18 years 	11 mg 	9 mg 	12 mg 	13 mg
19+ years 	11 mg 	8 mg 	11 mg 	12 mg

*Adequate Intake (AI)
Sources of Zinc
Food

Meat, fish and other seafood, eggs, and dairy products are good sources of zinc. Oysters contain particularly high amounts of zinc. Beans, nuts, and whole grains also contain zinc, but the bioavailability of zinc from these foods is lower than that of animal foods.

The richest food sources of zinc include meat and fish, and other seafood [3]. Oysters contain more zinc per serving than any other food, but beef contributes 20% of zinc intakes from food in the United States because it is commonly consumed [7]. Eggs and dairy products also contain zinc [3]. Beans, nuts, and whole grains contain zinc, but the bioavailability of zinc from these foods is lower than that from animal foods because these foods contain phytates. Phytates, the storage form of phosphorus in plants, bind some minerals such as zinc in the intestine and form an insoluble complex that inhibits zinc absorption [1-3,8]. Fruits and vegetables contain very little zinc.

Breakfast cereals, which are often fortified with zinc, are a major source of zinc in the U.S. diet [3]. Among children and adolescents in the United States, 12.1% to 18.4% of daily zinc intakes come from enriched and fortified foods [9].

The amount of zinc absorbed from food ranges from 5% to more than 50%, depending on the amount of plant-based foods (and thus of phytate) in the diet [3]. The absorption of zinc from mixed meals or diets containing a combination of animal-based and plant-based foods is lower than from diets or meals containing animal-based foods only [10].

Table 2 lists a variety of foods and their zinc content per serving [11].
Table 2: Zinc Content of Selected Foods [11] Food 	Milligrams (mg) per
serving 	Percent
DV*
Oysters, Eastern, farmed, raw, 3 ounces 	32 	291
Oysters, Pacific, cooked, 3 ounces 	28.2 	256
Beef, bottom sirloin, roasted, 3 ounces 	3.8 	35
Blue crab, cooked, 3 ounces 	3.2 	29
Breakfast cereals, fortified with 25% of the DV for zinc, 1 serving 	2.8 	25
Cereals, oats, regular and quick, unenriched, cooked with water, 1 cup 	2.3 	21
Pumpkin seeds, roasted, 1 ounce 	2.2 	20
Pork, center loin (chops), bone in, broiled, 3 ounces 	1.9 	17
Turkey breast, meat only, roasted, 3 ounces 	1.5 	14
Cheese, cheddar, 1.5 ounces 	1.5 	14
Shrimp, cooked, 3 ounces 	1.4 	13
Lentils, boiled, ½ cup 	1.3 	12
Sardines, canned in oil, drained solids with bone, 3 ounces 	1.1 	10
Greek yogurt, plain, 6 ounces 	1.0 	9
Milk, 1% milkfat, 1 cup 	1.0 	9
Peanuts, dry roasted, 1 ounce 	0.8 	7
Rice, brown, long grain, cooked, ½ cup 	0.7 	6
Egg, 1 large  	0.6 	5
Kidney beans, canned, ½ cup 	0.6 	5
Bread, whole wheat, 1 slice 	0.6 	5
Fish, salmon, cooked, 3 ounces 	0.5 	5
Broccoli, chopped, cooked, ½ cup 	0.4 	4
Rice, white, long grain, cooked, ½ cup 	0.3 	3
Bread, white, 1 slice 	0.2 	2
Cherry tomatoes, raw, ½ cup 	0.1 	1
Blueberries, raw, ½ cup 	0.1 	1

*DV = Daily Value. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) developed DVs to help consumers compare the nutrient contents of foods and dietary supplements within the context of a total diet. The DV for zinc is 11 mg for adults and children age 4 years and older [12]. FDA does not require food labels to list zinc content unless zinc has been added to the food. Foods providing 20% or more of the DV are considered to be high sources of a nutrient, but foods providing lower percentages of the DV also contribute to a healthful diet.

The U.S. Department of Agriculture’s (USDA's) FoodData Central lists the nutrient content of many foods and provides a comprehensive list of foods containing zinc arranged by nutrient content and by food name.
Dietary supplements

Forms of zinc that are commonly found in dietary supplements include zinc sulfate, zinc acetate, and zinc gluconate. Taking supplements that contain a substantial amount of iron (≥25 mg) at the same time as zinc supplements can reduce zinc absorption and plasma concentrations of zinc.

Zinc is available in supplements that only contain zinc, supplements that contain zinc in combination with other ingredients, and in many multivitamin/mineral products [13]. Supplements can contain any of a variety of forms of zinc, including zinc sulfate, zinc acetate, and zinc gluconate [14]. The Supplement Facts panel on a dietary supplement label declares the amount of elemental zinc in the product, not the weight of the entire zinc-containing compound.

Absorption of zinc from supplements that contain zinc citrate or zinc gluconate is similar, at approximately 61% in young adults; the absorption from supplements that contain zinc oxide is 50% [15]. Taking supplements containing 25 mg elemental iron or more at the same time as zinc supplements can reduce zinc absorption and plasma zinc concentrations [16-19]. However, the iron added to enriched or fortified foods does not significantly interfere with zinc absorption because the chemical form of iron used in fortification is typically poorly soluble in the gut and does not compete strongly with zinc for absorpion.
Other sources

Some homeopathic products and nasal sprays contain zinc. These products are often sold over the counter for managing the symptoms of the common cold and flu and providing immune support. Zinc is also present in some denture creams. Although the zinc intakes from these products are not a concern when they are used as directed, excessive use could lead to zinc toxicity.

Products the contain zinc include some homeopathic medications as well as nasal sprays that are sold over the counter to treat or prevent the common cold, manage flu symptoms, and support immune system health.

Some denture adhesive creams contain 17 to 34 mg zinc per gram of product to enhance their adhesive properties [20]. Use of these products as directed (0.5–1.5 g denture cream/day) is not a concern. However, chronic, excessive use can lead to zinc toxicity, which can cause copper deficiency and neurologic diseases. Such toxicity has been reported in individuals who use at least one tube that contains a total of 70 g or more denture cream each week for several years [21-23]. Many denture creams have been reformulated to omit zinc.
Zinc Intakes and Status

While people in certain age groups, such as older adults, are at higher risk of having marginal zinc intakes, most people in the United States consume an adequate amount of zinc. Zinc deficiency is much more common in low-income and middle-income countries than in the United States.

Most people in the United States consume adequate amounts of zinc, but people in certain age groups, especially older adults, might have marginal intakes. The average daily zinc intake from foods is 7.6 to 9.7 mg/day in children age 2 to 11 years, 10.1 mg/day in children and teens age 12 to 19 years, 13 mg/day in men older than 19, and 9.2 mg/day in women [24]. The average daily zinc intake from foods and supplements is 8.4 to 10.4 mg/day in children age 2 to 11 years, 10.7 mg/day in children and teens age 12 to 19 years, 16.4 mg/day in men, and 12.6 mg/day in women. In pregnant women age 20 to 40 years, the mean zinc intake is 12.4 mg/day from foods alone and 22.7 mg/day from foods and supplements [25].

Less than 1% of U.S. children age 2 to 8 years have zinc intakes from foods and supplements that are lower than the EAR. Among boys age 14 to 18 years, 1% have intakes below the EAR [9]. However, the proportion is much higher, 20.9%, in girls in this age group. National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) data from 2005 to 2016 show that among U.S. adults age 19 years and older, 15% have zinc intakes below the EAR [26].

In the United States, 3.8% of children younger than 10, 8.6% of males age 10 and older, and 8.2% of females have serum zinc concentrations below the serum zinc cutoff for sufficiency for their age and sex according to an analysis of 2011–2014 NHANES data [6,8]. The investigators used cutoffs developed by the Biomarkers of Nutrition for Development Zinc Expert Panel on the basis of a statistical definition: 57 to 65 mcg/dL for children younger than 10, 69 to 70 mcg/dL for females age 10 and older, and 61 to 74 mcg/dL for males age 10 and older [8].

Zinc deficiency as determined by serum or plasma concentrations is much more common in low-income and middle-income countries [27]. According to an estimate based on analyses of zinc and phytate available in national food supplies and the prevalence of stunting, approximately 17% of the world’s population is likely to have zinc deficiency [28].
Zinc Deficiency

Zinc deficiency affects many different organs and tissues in the body, and the signs and symptoms can vary by age. For example, zinc deficiency can delay growth and cause diarrhea and alopecia in children, and it can alter cognitive and psychological function in older adults. In pregnant women, zinc deficiency can increase the risk of maternal morbidity and adverse birth outcomes.

Because zinc has many functions throughout the body, zinc deficiency affects many different tissues and organs [29]. Zinc deficiency can affect, for example, skin; bones; and the digestive, reproductive, central nervous, and immune systems [29].

The manifestations of zinc deficiency vary by age [29]. In infants and children, diarrhea is a common sign. In older children, alopecia, delayed growth, and frequent infections become more prevalent. In both infants and children, zinc deficiency can impair growth and lead to a loss of appetite and reproductive problems when they reach adulthood [2,3,27,30]. In populations with low intakes of absorbable zinc (e.g., from meat and fish), including many low-income and middle-income countries, zinc deficiency affects the health of pregnant women and their infants by increasing the risk of child morbidity (including premature birth and low birthweight) and mortality, maternal morbidity, and adverse birth outcomes [27]. In addition, zinc deficiency can interfere with the senses of taste and smell [5]. Zinc deficiency in older adults can cause delays in wound healing and changes in cognitive and psychological function [29].
Groups at Risk of Zinc Inadequacy

Certain groups of people are more likely than others to have zinc inadequacy. These include people with gastrointestinal disorders and those who have had bariatric surgery, people who follow vegetarian or vegan diets, and women who are pregnant or lactating. In addition, infants who are exclusively breastfed after 6 months of age and children with sickle cell disease have a higher risk of zinc inadequacy, as do people with alcohol use disorder.

The following groups are among those most likely to have inadequate zinc status.
People with gastrointestinal disorders or who have had bariatric surgery

Zinc inadequacy is common in people with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD, which includes ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease) and those who have had bariatric surgery that involved a resection of the gastrointestinal tract. This is due to poor dietary intake, decreased zinc absorption, or increased urinary excretion as a result of inflammation [31,32]. Approximately 15% to 40% of people with IBD have zinc deficiency during active disease states and while in remission [31,32]. In patients with zinc deficiency, the risk of IBD-related symptoms (e.g., anemia, hemorrhage, abdominal or perianal fistula) increases, and these patients are more likely to need hospitalization or surgery. Zinc supplementation might reduce these risks [31].

Approximately 50% of people with newly diagnosed celiac disease have a high risk of zinc inadequacy or deficiency; potential contributors to this risk might include zinc malabsorption and mucosal inflammation [33,34]. These deficiencies sometimes persist even when people with celiac disease avoid foods containing gluten [34].
People who follow vegetarian or vegan diets

The bioavailability of zinc from vegetarian diets is often lower than from nonvegetarian diets because people who follow vegetarian diets typically eat large amounts of legumes and whole grains, which contain phytates that bind zinc and inhibit its absorption [2]. In addition, meat is high in bioavailable zinc [35]. As a result, people who follow vegetarian diets and vegan diets usually have lower dietary intakes of zinc and lower serum zinc levels than those who include animal products in their diet [36].

People who follow vegetarian or vegan diets might benefit from using certain food preparation techniques that reduce the binding of zinc by phytates and increase its bioavailability, such as soaking beans, grains, and seeds in water for several hours before cooking them [37]. Canned and pre-cooked items are another option. In addition, organic acids in fermented foods might increase zinc absorption [37]. People who follow vegetarian or vegan diets might also benefit from zinc supplements [38].
Women who are pregnant or lactating

During pregnancy, the amount of zinc needed increases to accommodate fetal growth, and the FNB therefore recommends that pregnant women consume 3 mg/day more zinc than nonpregnant women in the same age group [1,3]. Similarly, the zinc requirement increases by 4 mg/day during lactation.

NHANES data from 2001 to 2014 show that 11% of pregnant women in the United States have total zinc intakes from foods and supplements that are below the EAR [25]. Low serum zinc concentrations during pregnancy might increase the risk of preeclampsia and low-birthweight infants [39,40]. Routine zinc supplementation during pregnancy does not appear to reduce the risk of low birthweight, stillbirth, or neonatal death, but it might lower the risk of preterm birth [41].

During lactation, some [42,43] but not all [44] studies show that adequate intakes of foods rich in zinc increase concentrations of the mineral in breast milk. Evidence is also conflicting on whether zinc supplementation during lactation increases the zinc content of breast milk [45,46].
Older infants who are exclusively breastfed

Zinc concentrations in breast milk peak during the first month after birth and then decline by approximately 75% by the ninth month [3]. Because of this sharp drop, human breast milk alone is not sufficient to meet the infant’s zinc requirement after age 6 months [3,47]. The FNB recommends that in addition to breast milk, infants age 7 to 12 months consume age-appropriate foods or formula that contains zinc [1].
Children with sickle cell disease

Children with sickle cell disease (SCD) have a high risk of zinc insufficiency or deficiency, possibly as a result of the chelation therapy used to treat iron overload [3,48]. Children with SCD and low zinc status often are shorter and weigh less than age-matched peers, and they also have a higher risk of maturation delays, vaso-occlusive pain crises (blockages of blood flow to an area of the body), and associated hospitalizations [48]. Supplemental zinc might enhance growth in children with SCD and decrease the risk of bacterial infections, hospitalizations, and vaso-occlusive pain crises [3,48,49].
People with alcohol use disorder

Low zinc status has been observed in 30% to 50% of people with alcohol use disorder [1,50]. Ethanol consumption decreases intestinal absorption of zinc and increases urinary zinc excretion [1,50,51,52]. In addition, the variety and amount of food consumed by many people with alcohol use disorder is limited, leading to inadequate zinc intake [53,54].
Zinc and Health

This section focuses on the following diseases and disorders in which zinc might play a role: the common cold, pneumonia in children, HIV in children and adults, acute childhood diarrhea (which often results from infections), age-related macular degeneration (AMD), and type 2 diabetes. For information on zinc and COVID-19, see Dietary Supplements in the Time of COVID-19.
The common cold

The clinical trials that have evaluated the use of zinc supplements in people with the common cold have reported mixed results. In general, studies have found that taking supplemental zinc in lozenge or syrup form early in the course of the cold can reduce the duration of the signs and symptoms of the cold. However, the use of these products does not appear to affect the severity of those signs and symptoms.

Researchers have hypothesized that zinc could reduce the duration and severity of cold symptoms by directly inhibiting rhinovirus binding and replication in the nasal mucosa and suppressing inflammation [55,56]. In studies examining the effects of zinc supplements on the common cold, zinc is usually administered in a lozenge or syrup that temporarily sticks to the mouth and throat, placing the zinc in contact with the rhinovirus in those areas.

The results from clinical trials that have examined the effects of supplemental zinc on the common cold have been inconsistent. Overall, however, supplemental zinc in lozenge or syrup form appears to reduce the duration, but not the severity, of signs and symptoms of the common cold when taken shortly after a person develops a cold [57-61].

In one clinical trial, 50 adults took a zinc acetate lozenge (13.3 mg zinc) or placebo every 2 to 3 wakeful hours within 24 hours of developing the common cold for as long as they had cold symptoms. Compared with placebo, the zinc lozenges reduced the duration of colds by 3 days and the severity of cold symptoms (cough, nasal discharge, and muscle aches) [62]. In another clinical trial, 273 adults with experimentally induced colds were randomly assigned to take lozenges that contained zinc gluconate (13.3 mg zinc) or zinc acetate (5.0 mg or 11.5 mg zinc) every 2 to 3 hours while awake, for a total of six lozenges per day, or placebo, for up to 14 days [63]. Illnesses lasted 1 day less with the zinc gluconate lozenges than with the placebo, but the lozenges had no effect on symptom severity. Furthermore, the 5.0 and 11.5 mg zinc acetate lozenges had no effect on cold duration or severity. In a second trial described in the same report, neither zinc gluconate nor zinc acetate lozenges affected the duration or severity of cold symptoms compared with placebo in 281 adults with colds [63].

A 2021 systematic review and meta-analysis found that zinc appears to reduce the duration of the common cold but has mixed effects on the severity of signs and symptoms [57]. It included 28 clinical trials (including the three described above) with a total of 5,446 participants (mostly adults younger than 65 years) who had a community-acquired viral respiratory tract infection or were inoculated with a rhinovirus. Most trials provided zinc in the form of zinc acetate or gluconate lozenges at total daily doses of 45 mg to 300 mg for up to 2 weeks, but some trials used nasal sprays or gels. In participants who used products that contained zinc, symptoms resolved an average of 2 days earlier than in those who took placebo. Zinc also reduced the severity of symptoms on the third day of illness. However, average daily symptom severity did not differ between those who were and were not treated with zinc. In addition, zinc did not affect the risk of developing a cold after rhinovirus inoculation. In addition, zinc did not affect the risk of developing a cold after rhinovirus inoculation.

More recently, the authors of a 2024 Cochrane Review concluded that zinc may reduce symptom duration by about 2 days in people who already have a cold, but zinc appears to make little to no difference in preventing colds [61]. These conclusions were based on the results of 34 trials in a total of 8,526 participants, and most of the trials administered zinc in the form of lozenges. The authors also concluded that it is unclear whether zinc affects the severity of cold symptoms. They noted that all of these conclusions were based on low to very low certainty of evidence.

Other recent systematic reviews and meta-analyses have also found that zinc shortens the duration of colds but does not reduce the risk of colds [64-66]. The author of an earlier systematic review concluded that the use of zinc lozenges at doses of over 75 mg/day reduced the duration of the common cold, whereas lower doses did not [59].
Pneumonia in children

Because poor zinc status is associated with a higher risk of pneumonia in children, researchers have evaluated whether zinc supplementation can help prevent or treat this disease. Research suggests that zinc supplementation can reduce the incidence and prevalence of pneumonia in infants and children in low-income countries where zinc deficiency is common, but most research has found that the adjunctive use of zinc supplements to treat pneumonia in children does not significantly reduce the risk of death or the time to recovery.

In low-income countries, pneumonia is responsible for 15% of all deaths in children younger than 5 years and for 19% of all childhood deaths [67]. Poor zinc status is associated with greater susceptibility to pneumonia, more severe disease, and higher risk of death in children [68-71].

Several clinical trials have examined the effects of zinc supplementation on the incidence of pneumonia and as an adjunctive treatment for pneumonia. A 2016 Cochrane Review of six trials in low-income countries found that supplementation with 10 to 20 mg zinc for up to 20 months in a total of 5,193 children age 2 to 59 months resulted in lower incidence and prevalence of pneumonia than placebo [67].

However, most research suggests that the adjunctive use of zinc supplements to treat pneumonia in children does not affect mortality or time to recovery. A 2020 systematic review and meta-analysis included 11 clinical trials that enrolled children with pneumonia who were 2 to 60 months old and who lived in low- and middle-income countries [72]. Most of these children had severe pneumonia. Mortality rates from pneumonia and time to recovery from severe pneumonia did not differ between children treated with 10 to 20 mg/day supplemental zinc and those treated with placebo for 7 to 14 days or until discharge. Another meta-analysis of six placebo-controlled trials that included 2,216 children age 2 to 60 months found that zinc supplementation reduced mortality rates from severe pneumonia but not the rates of treatment failure or the number of children who required a change in antibiotic therapy [73].
HIV in children and adults

People with HIV often have low zinc status. However, research on the use of zinc supplementation in people with HIV has produced mixed results. While some clinical trials have reported that zinc supplements have some benefits in people with HIV, such as reduced rates of immunological failure events and diarrhea, other research has found little to no effect on CD4+ T-cell counts, viral load, mortality, or the frequency of diarrhea.

HIV infection reduces the absorption and metabolism of zinc from foods [3]. In addition, people with HIV often have diarrhea, which can result in excessive losses of zinc. For these reasons, people with HIV often have low plasma or serum zinc levels.

Several clinical trials have reported that zinc supplementation may help manage the morbidity and mortality associated with HIV infection. One trial randomly assigned 231 adults who had HIV and plasma zinc levels lower than 75 mcg/dL to receive supplemental zinc (12 mg/day for women or 15 mg/day for men) or placebo for 18 months [74]. The supplements reduced rates of immunological failure events (CD4+ T-cell counts <200 cells/mL) by 76% and rates of diarrhea by 60% but had no effect on mortality. Another trial in Iran randomized 146 adults with HIV to receive 50 mg/day zinc, 200 mcg/day selenium, or placebo for 6 months and then followed participants for another 3 months [75]. The participants who were randomized to receive zinc supplements had decreased rates of opportunistic infections but did not have improved CD4+ T-cell counts.

However, findings were less positive in two Cochrane Reviews and another trial (not included in either Cochrane Review) that assessed the potential benefits of supplementation with micronutrients, including zinc, in various populations with HIV. The first Cochrane Review, which focused on micronutrient supplementation for children with HIV, included two trials that administered 10 mg/day zinc for up to 15 months in a total of 128 children with HIV in South Africa [76]. One of the trials compared zinc with placebo, while the other trial compared zinc plus vitamin A (with or without other micronutrients) with vitamin A alone. The first trial found that the risk of watery diarrhea was 49% lower with zinc supplements than with placebo, whereas the other trial found no differences among the three treatment arms (zinc plus vitamin A, zinc plus vitamin A with other micronutrients, and vitamin A alone) in the prevalence of diarrhea.

A subsequent Cochrane Review that evaluated micronutrient supplements for adults with HIV included six placebo-controlled trials of zinc supplements (12–50 mg/day for 14 days to 18 months or 1 weekly 90 mg dose for 6 months) in a total of 826 participants [77]. The authors concluded that although zinc supplements might improve zinc status, the supplements appeared to have little, if any, effect on CD4+ T-cell counts or viral load and inconclusive effects on mortality and diarrhea frequency. In a trial in 400 pregnant women with HIV in Tanzania, taking 25 mg/day zinc until 6 weeks after delivery did not result in any differences in birth weight, duration of gestation, or rates of fetal mortality or early mother-to-child transmission of HIV compared with placebo [78,79]. In addition, zinc supplementation did not affect maternal viral load or CD4+, CD8+, or CD3+ T-cell counts. However, the supplements blunted the rise in hemoglobin concentrations between baseline and 6 weeks postpartum.

More evidence is required to determine whether zinc supplements might be helpful for people with HIV.
Childhood acute diarrhea

The results of several clinical trials indicate that zinc supplementation can reduce the duration of acute diarrhea in children who live in low-income countries. The World Health Organization and UNICEF recommend short-term zinc supplementation of 10 or 20 mg/day (depending on age) for 10 to 14 days to treat acute childhood diarrhea. However, because most trials that evaluated the use of zinc supplementation for diarrhea have been conducted in low-income countries where zinc deficiency is common, the effects may be marginal in well-nourished children.

Acute diarrhea is associated with high mortality rates among children in low-income countries, where it causes about 525,000 deaths annually [80,81]. Zinc is used to treat acute diarrhea in children, especially in low-income countries where zinc deficiency is common. Scientists believe that zinc’s beneficial effects stem from its role in supporting adaptive immunity and maintaining the mucosal integrity of the gastrointestinal system [80].

Clinical trials have shown that zinc supplementation helps shorten the duration of diarrhea in children who live in low-income countries. A 2016 Cochrane Review included 33 trials that compared the effects of zinc supplementation with placebo in 10,841 children age 1 month to 5 years with acute or persistent diarrhea [82]. Most studies were conducted in Asian countries with high rates of zinc deficiency. The investigators administered zinc in the form of zinc acetate, zinc gluconate, or zinc sulfate. The most common dose was 20 mg/day, and about half the studies administered zinc for 2 weeks. The authors concluded, on the basis of evidence of low to moderate certainty, that zinc supplementation shortens the duration of diarrhea by about half a day in children older than 6 months and reduces the likelihood that diarrhea will persist for at least 7 days by 27%. In children younger than 6 months, however, zinc supplementation did not affect the mean duration of diarrhea or the proportion of children who had diarrhea for 7 days, although this finding was based on low certainty of evidence. In addition, evidence that the authors deemed to have high certainty showed that zinc supplementation reduces the duration of diarrhea in children with signs of malnutrition by about a day.

A 2018 systematic review and meta-analysis had similar findings. It examined the use of zinc alone or in combination with other treatments for acute diarrhea and gastroenteritis in 174 studies in 32,430 children who were mostly from low- and middle-income countries [83]. The authors concluded that zinc was one of the most effective interventions of those examined, especially when it was combined with Saccharomyces boulardii (a probiotic) or smectite (a natural clay that contains minerals), for reducing the duration of acute diarrhea and gastroenteritis in children. Analyses showed that zinc alone or in combination reduced the duration of diarrhea by about ¾ to 1½ days.

The World Health Organization and UNICEF recommend short-term zinc supplementation—20 mg/day, or 10 mg/day for infants under 6 months, for 10 to 14 days—to treat acute childhood diarrhea [84]. Most trials of zinc supplementation for diarrhea have been conducted in low-income countries [80]. Zinc supplements might have only a marginal effect on diarrhea duration in well-nourished children.
Age-related macular degeneration

Observational evidence suggests that older adults who have higher zinc intakes have a lower risk of age-related macular degeneration. The results from large clinical trials indicate that taking dietary supplements that contain zinc, copper, and certain antioxidants (known as AREDS formulations) slows the progression of age-related macular degeneration among people who are at high risk of developing the advanced form of this condition.

AMD is the leading cause of significant vision loss in older people [85]. The human retina has a high zinc concentration, and research has shown that taking supplements that contain both zinc and antioxidants might delay the progression of AMD and vision loss, possibly by preventing cellular damage in the retina [3,86,87].

Observational evidence suggests a link between higher zinc intakes and a lower risk of AMD. In a population-based cohort study in the Netherlands that included 4,170 adults age 55 or older, dietary zinc intake was inversely associated with the risk of AMD over a mean follow-up period of 8 years [88]. Similarly, a study of 2,464 adults age 49 or older in Australia found that at 5-year and 10-year follow-ups, participants with intakes of zinc from food and supplements in the top decile (at least 15.8 mg/day) had a 44% lower risk of any AMD and a 46% lower risk of early AMD than participants in all other deciles [89].

Clinical trial evidence has confirmed that zinc supplementation, in combination with copper and certain antioxidants, can slow the progression of AMD. The Age-Related Eye Disease Study (AREDS) was a clinical trial in 4,757 participants age 50 to 80 years with a high risk of advanced AMD (i.e., they had intermediate AMD or advanced AMD in one eye and good vision in the other eye) [87]. AREDS found that participants who took a supplement each day containing 80 mg zinc in the form of zinc oxide, 15 mg (7,500 mcg retinol activity equivalent [RAE]) beta-carotene, 180 mg (400 International Units [IU]) vitamin E in the form of dl-alpha-tocopheryl acetate, 500 mg vitamin C, and 2 mg copper for 5 years had a 25% lower risk of advanced AMD than those taking a placebo.

The follow-up AREDS2 study confirmed the value of the AREDS supplement in reducing the progression of AMD in 4,203 participants over a median follow-up period of 5 years [90]. AREDS2 also showed that a formulation that included 25 mg zinc (about one-third the amount in the original formulation) provided the same protective effect against advanced AMD. However, because AREDS2 had fewer participants than the original AREDS study, and fewer than half took the formula that contained less zinc, the researchers viewed this finding as preliminary. The National Eye Institute recommends use of an AREDS formulation that provides 80 mg zinc [91,92].

Individuals who have or are developing AMD should talk to their health care provider about their zinc intakes and the supplement formulations used in the AREDS studies.
Type 2 diabetes

Zinc depletion may play a role in the progression of type 2 diabetes, as some observational studies have suggested a link between low zinc intakes and a higher risk of this condition. In addition, some clinical trials have reported that zinc supplements have beneficial effects on certain outcomes, including total cholesterol, triglyceride levels, fasting glucose, and insulin resistance. However, other trials have had conflicting results regarding zinc’s effects. Overall, there is insufficient evidence to support the use of zinc supplementation to reduce the risk of type 2 diabetes or mitigate its symptoms.

Zinc concentrations are often low in people with type 2 diabetes [2,3]. Researchers therefore hypothesize that zinc depletion might play a role in diabetes progression.

Several observational studies have found an association between zinc intakes and the risk of type 2 diabetes. In a systematic review and meta-analysis that included 16 observational studies conducted in the United States, Australia, Sweden, India, and Japan with a total of 146,027 men and women age 18 to 84 years, the risk of type 2 diabetes was 13% lower in participants with the highest zinc intakes than in those with the lowest intakes [93]. When the researchers analyzed the influence of area of residence on the results, the associations between zinc intakes and type 2 diabetes risk were significant only for studies conducted in rural areas and not those conducted in urban areas.

Clinical trials have assessed the utility of zinc supplements to reduce the risk of type 2 diabetes or to manage its complications. In a 2015 Cochrane Review of the clinical trial evidence on zinc supplementation for type 2 diabetes prevention, only three trials with a total of 128 participants met the inclusion criteria [94]. These studies administered 30 mg/day to 100 mg/day zinc (in the form of zinc sulfate or zinc amino chelate) for 4 to 12 weeks, but the quality of these studies could not be assessed because of the lack of relevant information in the study reports. The Cochrane Review authors concluded that evidence is lacking on which to base conclusions about the use of zinc supplementation to prevent type 2 diabetes.

However, studies published since the Cochrane Review have had more positive findings. A systematic review and meta-analysis included nine placebo-controlled trials that assessed the effects of zinc supplementation (7 mg/day to 150 mg/day) for 6 to 52 weeks on lipid profiles in a total of 424 people with type 2 diabetes [95]. The supplements had beneficial effects on serum levels of triglycerides and total cholesterol but not on serum levels of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol or high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol.

A second systematic review and meta-analysis compared the effects of low-dose zinc supplements (<25 mg/day) with those of high-dose supplements (25–75 mg/day) on risk factors for type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease in 27 clinical trials (including two from the 2015 Cochrane Review) [96]. Zinc supplements or placebo were administered for 4 weeks to 12 months (mean 11 weeks) to participants age 6 to 106 years (but most studies included adults age 20 to 70 years). A total of 1,042 participants received zinc supplements and 974 received placebo. Although low-dose and high-dose zinc supplements had beneficial effects on several of the assessed outcomes, low doses of zinc and longer administration improved a larger number of risk factors. For example, studies that administered zinc supplements for less than 12 weeks had beneficial effects on fasting blood glucose, insulin resistance, and triglyceride levels, whereas studies that administered the supplements for longer had positive effects on fasting blood glucose, hemoglobin A1c, triglyceride, total cholesterol, and LDL cholesterol levels. Sensitivity analyses showed no significant effect of zinc dosage on these outcomes.

A third systematic review and meta-analysis evaluated the effects of zinc supplements on type 2 diabetes prevention and management in 32 trials that administered zinc supplements (4 to 240 mg/day zinc, mean 35 mg/day) or placebo for 1 to 12 months to a total of 1,700 adults age 18 and older with type 2 diabetes (except for one study that enrolled children age 6 to 10 years) [97]. The supplements reduced fasting glucose, 2-hour postprandial glucose, fasting insulin, insulin resistance, glycated hemoglobin, and C-reactive protein levels. Glycemic indicators did not vary by zinc dosage (<30 mg/day or ≥30 mg/day) or duration of supplementation (1 month or >1 month).

Research has also explored the potential benefits of zinc supplementation in people with gestational diabetes. A systematic review and meta-analysis of five placebo-controlled trials that included 263 people with gestational diabetes evaluated the effects of zinc supplementation (4–30 mg/day zinc with or without vitamin E, magnesium, calcium, vitamin D, or a combination) on metabolic status [98]. The supplements had beneficial effects on fasting plasma glucose, insulin, and insulin resistance, but did not affect LDL or total cholesterol levels. However, because this analysis included studies that administered zinc in combination with other nutrients, the potential contribution of zinc by itself cannot be assessed.

Up to one-quarter of people with type 2 diabetes develop diabetic foot ulcers, which can result in amputation [99]. A Cochrane Review of nutritional interventions to treat diabetic foot ulcers included one trial in 60 participants of 50 mg/day zinc (in the form of zinc sulfate) or placebo for 12 weeks [100]. The authors concluded that whether zinc supplements affect diabetic foot ulcers over time is uncertain.

Overall, the evidence to date is insufficient to support any conclusions about the impact of zinc supplementation on the prevalence or severity of type 2 diabetes, gestational diabetes, or diabetic foot ulcers.
Health Risks from Excessive Zinc

Getting excessive amounts of zinc can cause nausea, dizziness, headaches, gastric distress, vomiting, and loss of appetite. Doses of 50 mg of zinc or more over a period of weeks can inhibit copper absorption, reduce immune function, and lower high-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels; however, it is unlikely that a person would obtain this much zinc from food alone. The Tolerable Upper Intake Level for zinc is 40 mg for adults, and it ranges from 4 to 34 mg for infants, children, and adolescents, depending on age.

High zinc intakes can cause nausea, dizziness, headaches, gastric distress, vomiting, and loss of appetite [2,3]. If used for weeks, doses of 50 mg zinc or more—typically from supplements or excessive use of denture adhesive creams that contain zinc—can interfere with copper absorption (which can cause low copper status), reduce immune function, and lower HDL cholesterol levels [1-3,101]. The amount of zinc obtained from food is rarely as high as 50 mg, so the zinc in foods is unlikely to cause zinc toxicity. Very high doses of zinc from supplements (142 mg/day) might also interfere with magnesium absorption and disrupt magnesium balance [102].

According to a few reports, overuse of denture adhesive creams that contain up to 34 mg zinc per gram of product can lead to neurological symptoms (including sensory ataxia and myelopathy) and anemia. Zinc-free formulations are available to prevent these effects [2,20,21].

The FNB has established ULs for zinc from food and supplements for healthy individuals based on the levels of zinc that have an adverse effect on copper status (Table 3) [1]. The ULs do not apply to individuals who are receiving zinc for medical treatment, but such individuals should be under the care of a physician.
Table 3: Tolerable Upper Intake Levels (ULs) for Zinc in Milligrams (mg) [1] Age 	Male 	Female 	Pregnancy 	Lactation
0–6 months 	4 mg 	4 mg 		
7–12 months 	5 mg 	5 mg 		
1–3 years 	7 mg 	7 mg 		
4–8 years 	12 mg 	12 mg 		
9–13 years 	23 mg 	23 mg 		
14–18 years 	34 mg 	34 mg 	34 mg 	34 mg
19+ years 	40 mg 	40 mg 	40 mg 	40 mg
Interactions with Medications

Zinc may interact with certain medications, such as quinolone antibiotics, tetracycline antibiotics, and penicillamine. In addition, some diuretics can decrease serum zinc concentrations by increasing zinc excretion in urine.

Zinc has the potential to interact with certain medications. In addition, several types of medications might adversely affect zinc levels. A few examples are provided below. Individuals who are taking these and other medications on a regular basis should discuss their zinc status with their health care providers.
Antibiotics

Both quinolone antibiotics (such as Cipro) and tetracycline antibiotics (such as Achromycin and Sumycin) might interact with zinc in the gastrointestinal tract, which could inhibit the absorption of both zinc and the antibiotic if they are taken at the same time [103,104]. Taking the antibiotic at least 2 hours before or 4 to 6 hours after the zinc supplement minimizes this interaction [103].
Penicillamine

Zinc can reduce the absorption and action of penicillamine, a drug used to treat rheumatoid arthritis and Wilson disease [105]. To minimize this interaction, people should take zinc supplements and penicillamine at least 1 hour apart.
Diuretics

Thiazide diuretics, such as chlorthalidone (e.g., Hygroton, Thalitone) and hydrochlorothiazide (e.g., Esidrix, HydroDIURIL), increase zinc excretion in the urine. This increased excretion, in turn, decreases serum zinc concentrations [106].
Zinc and Healthful Diets

In general, a person’s nutritional needs should be met primarily through the diet, including fortified foods. Dietary supplements may be useful in cases where it is not possible to meet the needs for specific nutrients through food alone, especially during certain life stages. The Dietary Guidelines for Americans offers a general description of healthy dietary patterns.

The federal government’s 2020–2025 Dietary Guidelines for Americans notes that "Because foods provide an array of nutrients and other components that have benefits for health, nutritional needs should be met primarily through foods....In some cases, fortified foods and dietary supplements are useful when it is not possible otherwise to meet needs for one or more nutrients (e.g., during specific life stages such as pregnancy)."

For more information about building a healthy dietary pattern, refer to the Dietary Guidelines for Americans and the USDA’s MyPlate.

The Dietary Guidelines for Americans describes a healthy eating pattern as one that

    Includes a variety of vegetables, fruits, whole grains, fat-free or low-fat milk and milk products, and oils.
        Some dairy products are good sources of zinc. Some ready-to-eat breakfast cereals are fortified with zinc.
    Includes a variety of protein-rich foods, such as lean meats, poultry, eggs, seafood, beans, peas, lentils, nuts, seeds, and soy products.
        Some meats contain high amounts of zinc. Fish and seafood are good sources of zinc.
    Limits foods and beverages that are higher in added sugars, saturated fat, and sodium.
    Limits alcoholic beverages.
    Stays within your daily calorie needs.

References

    Institute of Medicine. Food and Nutrition Board. Dietary Reference Intakes for Vitamin A, Vitamin K, Arsenic, Boron, Chromium, Copper, Iodine, Iron, Manganese, Molybdenum, Nickel, Silicon, Vanadium, and Zinc Washington, DC: National Academy Press; 2001.
    Ryu M-S, Aydemir TB. Zinc. In: Marriott BP, Birt DF, Stallings VA, Yates AA, eds. Present Knowledge in Nutrition. 11th ed. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Wiley-Blackwell; 2020:393-408.
    King JC, Cousins RJ. Zinc. In: Ross AC, Caballero B, Cousins RJ, Tucker KL, Ziegler TR, eds. Modern Nutrition in Health and Disease. 11th ed. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2014:189-205.
    MacDonald RS. The Role of Zinc in Growth and Cell Proliferation. The Journal of Nutrition 2000;130:1500S-8S. [PubMed abstract]
    Nagraj SK, Naresh S, Srinivas K, George RP, Shetty N, Levenson D, et al. Interventions for the managing taste disturbances. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2017:CD010470. [PubMed abstract]
    Hennigar SR, Lieberman HR, Fulgoni VL, 3rd, McClung JP. Serum Zinc Concentrations in the US population are related to sex, age, and time of blood draw but not dietary or supplemental zinc. J Nutr 2018;148:1341-51. [PubMed abstract]
    Huth PJ, Fulgoni VL, Keast DR, Park K, Auestad N. Major food sources of calories, added sugars, and saturated fat and their contribution to essential nutrient intakes in the U.S. diet: data from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (2003-2006). Nutr J 2013;12:116. [PubMed abstract]
    King JC, Brown KH, Gibson RS, Krebs NF, Lowe NM, Siekmann JH, et al. Biomarkers of Nutrition for Development (BOND)-Zinc Review. J Nutr 2015;146:858S-85S. [PubMed abstract]
    Berner LA, Keast DR, Bailey RL, Dwyer JT. Fortified foods are major contributors to nutrient intakes in diets of US children and adolescents. J Acad Nutr Diet 2014;114:1009-22.e8. [PubMed abstract]
    World Health Organization, Food and Agriculture Organization. Vitamin and Mineral Requirements in Human Nutrition. World Health Organization and Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2004.
    U.S. Department of Agriculture. FoodData Central. 2022.
    U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Food Labeling: Revision of the Nutrition and Supplement Facts Labels and Serving Sizes of Foods That Can Reasonably Be Consumed at One Eating Occasion; Dual-Column Labeling; Updating, Modifying, and Establishing Certain Reference Amounts Customarily Consumed; Serving Size for Breath Mints; and Technical Amendments; Proposed Extension of Compliance Dates. 2017.
    Office of Dietary Supplements, National Institutes of Health. Dietary Supplement Label Database. 2021.
    Brnic M, Wegmuller R, Melse-Boonstra A, Stomph T, Zeder C, Tay FM, et al. Zinc absorption by adults is similar from intrinsically labeled zinc- biofortified rice and from rice fortified with labeled zinc sulfate. J Nutr 2016;146:76-80. [PubMed abstract]
    Wegmuller R, Tay F, Zeder C, Brnic M, Hurrell RF. Zinc absorption by young adults from supplemental zinc citrate is comparable with that from zinc gluconate and higher than from zinc oxide. J Nutr 2014;144:132-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Solomons NW. Competitive interaction of iron and zinc in the diet: consequences for human nutrition. J Nutr 1986;116:927-35. [PubMed abstract]
    Whittaker P. Iron and zinc interactions in humans. Am J Clin Nutr 1998;68:442s-6s. [PubMed abstract]
    European Food Safety Authority. Scientific Opinion on Dietary Reference Values for zinc. 2014.
    Arredondo M, Martínez R, Núñez MT, Ruz M, Olivares M. Inhibition of iron and copper uptake by iron, copper and zinc. Biol Res 2006;39:95-102. [PubMed abstract]
    Nations SP, Boyer PJ, Love LA, Burritt MF, Butz JA, Wolfe GI, et al. Denture cream: an unusual source of excess zinc, leading to hypocupremia and neurologic disease. Neurology 2008;71:639-43. [PubMed abstract]
    Doherty K, Connor M, Cruickshank R. Zinc-containing denture adhesive: a potential source of excess zinc resulting in copper deficiency myelopathy. Br Dent J 2011;210:523-5. [PubMed abstract]
    Poujois A, Djebrani-Oussedik N, Ory-Magne F, Woimant F. Neurological presentations revealing acquired copper deficiency: diagnosis features, aetiologies and evolution in seven patients. Intern Med J 2018;48:535-40. [PubMed abstract]
    Jamal R, Dihmis OW, Carroll LS, Pengas G. Hypocupraemia-induced anaemia, sensory ataxia and cognitive impairment secondary to zinc-containing dental adhesive. BMJ Case Rep 2021;14. [PubMed abstract]
    U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service. What We Eat in America, 2017-2018. 2021.
    Bailey RL, Pac SG, Fulgoni VL, 3rd, Reidy KC, Catalano PM. Estimation of total usual dietary intakes of pregnant women in the United States. JAMA Netw Open 2019;2:e195967. [PubMed abstract]
    Reider CA, Chung RY, Devarshi PP, Grant RW, Hazels Mitmesser S. Inadequacy of immune health nutrients: intakes in US adults, the 2005-2016 NHANES. Nutrients 2020;12. [PubMed abstract]
    Gupta S, Brazier AKM, Lowe NM. Zinc deficiency in low- and middle-income countries: prevalence and approaches for mitigation. Journal of Human Nutrition and Dietetics 2020;33:624-43. [PubMed abstract]
    Wessells KR, Brown KH. Estimating the global prevalence of zinc deficiency: results based on zinc availability in national food supplies and the prevalence of stunting. PLoS One 2012;7:e50568. [PubMed abstract]
    Roohani N, Hurrell R, Kelishadi R, Schulin R. Zinc and its importance for human health: An integrative review. J Res Med Sci 2013;18:144-57. [PubMed abstract]
    Krebs NF. Update on zinc deficiency and excess in clinical pediatric practice. Ann Nutr Metab 2013;62 Suppl 1:19-29. [PubMed abstract]
    Siva S, Rubin DT, Gulotta G, Wroblewski K, Pekow J. Zinc deficiency is associated with poor clinical outcomes in patients with inflammatory bowel disease. Inflamm Bowel Dis 2017;23:152-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Ehrlich S, Mark AG, Rinawi F, Shamir R, Assa A. Micronutrient Deficiencies in Children With Inflammatory Bowel Diseases. Nutr Clin Pract 2020;35:315-22. [PubMed abstract]
    Wierdsma NJ, van Bokhorst-de van der Schueren MA, Berkenpas M, Mulder CJ, van Bodegraven AA. Vitamin and mineral deficiencies are highly prevalent in newly diagnosed celiac disease patients. Nutrients 2013;5:3975-92. [PubMed abstract]
    Rondanelli M, Faliva MA, Gasparri C, Peroni G, Naso M, Picciotto G, et al. Micronutrients dietary supplementation advices for celiac patients on long-term gluten-free diet with good compliance: a review. Medicina (Kaunas) 2019;55. [PubMed abstract]
    Bakaloudi DR, Halloran A, Rippin HL, Oikonomidou AC, Dardavesis TI, Williams J, et al. Intake and adequacy of the vegan diet. A systematic review of the evidence. Clin Nutr 2021;40:3503-21. [PubMed abstract]
    Foster M, Chu A, Petocz P, Samman S. Effect of vegetarian diets on zinc status: a systematic review and meta- analysis of studies in humans. J Sci Food Agric 2013;93:2362-71. [PubMed abstract]
    Agnoli C, Baroni L, Bertini I, Ciappellano S, Fabbri A, Papa M, et al. Position paper on vegetarian diets from the working group of the Italian Society of Human Nutrition. Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis 2017;27:1037-52. [PubMed abstract]
    Foster M, Samman S. Vegetarian diets across the lifecycle: impact on zinc intake and status. Adv Food Nutr Res 2015;74:93-131. [PubMed abstract]
    Wilson RL, Grieger JA, Bianco-Miotto T, Roberts CT. Association between maternal zinc status, dietary zinc intake and pregnancy complications: a systematic review. Nutrients 2016;8. [PubMed abstract]
    He L, Lang L, Li Y, Liu Q, Yao Y. Comparison of serum zinc, calcium, and magnesium concentrations in women with pregnancy-induced hypertension and healthy pregnant women: A meta- analysis. Hypertens Pregnancy 2016;35:202-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Ota E, Mori R, Middleton P, Tobe-Gai R, Mahomed K, Miyazaki C, et al. Zinc supplementation for improving pregnancy and infant outcome. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2015:Cd000230. [PubMed abstract]
    Bzikowska-Jura A, Sobieraj P, Michalska-Kacymirow M, Wesołowska A. Investigation of iron and zinc concentrations in human milk in correlation to maternal factors: an observational pilot study in Poland. Nutrients 2021;13:303. [PubMed abstract]
    Keikha M, Shayan-Moghadam R, Bahreynian M, Kelishadi R. Nutritional supplements and mother's milk composition: a systematic review of interventional studies. Int Breastfeed J 2021;16:1. [PubMed abstract]
    Aumeistere L, Ciproviča I, Zavadska D, Bavrins K, Borisova A. Zinc content in breast milk and its association with maternal diet. Nutrients 2018;10. [PubMed abstract]
    Abe SK, Balogun OO, Ota E, Takahashi K, Mori R. Supplementation with multiple micronutrients for breastfeeding women for improving outcomes for the mother and baby. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2016;2:Cd010647. [PubMed abstract]
    Katayama K, Hosui A, Sakai Y, Itou M, Matsuzaki Y, Takamori Y, et al. Effects of zinc acetate on serum zinc concentrations in chronic liver diseases: a multicenter, double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial and a dose adjustment trial. Biol Trace Elem Res 2020;195:71-81. [PubMed abstract]
    Ackland ML, Michalczyk AA. Zinc and infant nutrition. Arch Biochem Biophys 2016;611:51-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Martyres DJ, Vijenthira A, Barrowman N, Harris-Janz S, Chretien C, Klaassen RJ. Nutrient insufficiencies/deficiencies in children with sickle cell disease and its association with increased disease severity. Pediatr Blood Cancer 2016;63:1060-4. [PubMed abstract]
    Swe KM, Abas AB, Bhardwaj A, Barua A, Nair NS. Zinc supplements for treating thalassaemia and sickle cell disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2013:Cd009415. [PubMed abstract]
    Skalny AV, Skalnaya MG, Grabeklis AR, Skalnaya AA, Tinkov AA. Zinc deficiency as a mediator of toxic effects of alcohol abuse. Eur J Nutr 2018;57:2313-22. [PubMed abstract]
    Kang YJ, Zhou Z. Zinc prevention and treatment of alcoholic liver disease. Mol Aspects Med 2005;26:391-404. [PubMed abstract]
    McClain C, Vatsalya V, Cave M. Role of zinc in the development/progression of alcoholic liver disease. Curr Treat Options Gastroenterol 2017;15:285-95. [PubMed abstract]
    Navarro S, Valderrama R, To-Figueras J, Gimenez A, Lopez JM, et al. Role of zinc in the process of pancreatic fibrosis in chronic alcoholic pancreatitis. Pancreas 1994;9:270-74. [PubMed abstract]
    Menzano E, Carlen PL. Zinc deficiency and corticosteroids in the pathogenesis of alcoholic brain dysfunction--a review. Alcohol Clin Exp Res 1994;18:895-901. [PubMed abstract]
    Hulisz D. Efficacy of zinc against common cold viruses: an overview. J Am Pharm Assoc (2003) 2004;44:594-603. [PubMed abstract]
    Caruso TJ, Prober CG, Gwaltney JM, Jr. Treatment of naturally acquired common colds with zinc: a structured review. Clin Infect Dis 2007;45:569-74. [PubMed abstract]
    Hunter J, Arentz S, Goldenberg J, Yang G, Beardsley J, Myers SP, et al. Zinc for the prevention or treatment of acute viral respiratory tract infections in adults: a rapid systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. BMJ Open 2021;11:e047474. [PubMed abstract]
    Hemila H. Zinc lozenges and the common cold: a meta-analysis comparing zinc acetate and zinc gluconate, and the role of zinc dosage. JRSM Open 2017;8:2054270417694291. [PubMed abstract]
    Hemilä H. Zinc lozenges may shorten the duration of colds: a systematic review. Open Respir Med J 2011;5:51-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Science M, Johnstone J, Roth DE, Guyatt G, Loeb M. Zinc for the treatment of the common cold: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Cmaj 2012;184:E551-61. [PubMed abstract]
    Nault D, Machingo TA, Shipper AG, Antiporta DA, Hamel C, et al. Zinc for prevention and treatment of the common cold. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2024 May 9;5(5):CD014914. [PubMed abstract]
    Prasad AS, Beck FW, Bao B, Snell D, Fitzgerald JT. Duration and severity of symptoms and levels of plasma interleukin-1 receptor antagonist, soluble tumor necrosis factor receptor, and adhesion molecules in patients with common cold treated with zinc acetate. J Infect Dis 2008;197:795-802. [PubMed abstract]
    Turner RB, Cetnarowski WE. Effect of treatment with zinc gluconate or zinc acetate on experimental and natural colds. Clin Infect Dis 2000;31:1202-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Vlieg-Boerstra B, de Jong N, Meyer R, Agostoni C, De Cosmi V, et al. Nutrient supplementation for prevention of viral respiratory tract infections in healthy subjects: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Allergy 2022;77:1373-88. [PubMed abstract]
    Abioye AI, Bromage S, Fawzi W. Effect of micronutrient supplements on influenza and other respiratory tract infections among adults: A systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ Glob Health 2021;6. [PubMed abstract]
    Wang MX, Win SS, Pang J. Zinc supplementation reduces common cold duration among healthy adults: A systematic review of randomized controlled trials with micronutrients supplementation. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2020;103:86-99. [PubMed abstract]
    Lassi ZS, Moin A, Bhutta ZA. Zinc supplementation for the prevention of pneumonia in children aged 2 months to 59 months. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2016;12:Cd005978. [PubMed abstract]
    Saleh NY, Abo El Fotoh WMM. Low serum zinc level: The relationship with severe pneumonia and survival in critically ill children. Int J Clin Pract 2018;72:e13211. [PubMed abstract]
    Sakulchit T, Goldman RD. Zinc supplementation for pediatric pneumonia. Can Fam Physician 2017;63:763-5. [PubMed abstract]
    Black RE. Zinc deficiency, infectious disease and mortality in the developing world. J Nutr 2003;133:1485s-9s. [PubMed abstract]
    Walker CLF, Rudan I, Liu L, Nair H, Theodoratou E, Bhutta ZA, et al. Global burden of childhood pneumonia and diarrhoea. Lancet 2013;381:1405-16. [PubMed abstract]
    Brown N, Kukka AJ, Mårtensson A. Efficacy of zinc as adjunctive pneumonia treatment in children aged 2 to 60 months in low-income and middle-income countries: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ Paediatr Open 2020;4:e000662. [PubMed abstract]
    Wang L, Song Y. Efficacy of zinc given as an adjunct to the treatment of severe pneumonia: A meta-analysis of randomized, double-blind and placebo-controlled trials. Clin Respir J 2018;12:857-64. [PubMed abstract]
    Baum MK, Lai S, Sales S, Page JB, Campa A. Randomized, controlled clinical trial of zinc supplementation to prevent immunological failure in HIV-infected adults. Clin Infect Dis 2010;50:1653-60. [PubMed abstract]
    Hadadi A, Ostovar A, Edalat Noor B, Rasoolinejad M, Haji Abdolbaghi M, Yousefi S, et al. The effect of selenium and zinc on CD4(+) count and opportunistic infections in HIV/AIDS patients: a randomized double blind trial. Acta Clin Belg 2020;75:170-6. [PubMed abstract]
    Irlam JH, Siegfried N, Visser ME, Rollins NC. Micronutrient supplementation for children with HIV infection. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2013:Cd010666. [PubMed abstract]
    Visser ME, Durao S, Sinclair D, Irlam JH, Siegfried N. Micronutrient supplementation in adults with HIV infection. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2017;5:Cd003650. [PubMed abstract]
    Fawzi WW, Villamor E, Msamanga GI, Antelman G, Aboud S, Urassa W, et al. Trial of zinc supplements in relation to pregnancy outcomes, hematologic indicators, and T cell counts among HIV-1-infected women in Tanzania. Am J Clin Nutr 2005;81:161-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Villamor E, Aboud S, Koulinska IN, Kupka R, Urassa W, Chaplin B, et al. Zinc supplementation to HIV-1-infected pregnant women: effects on maternal anthropometry, viral load, and early mother-to-child transmission. Eur J Clin Nutr 2006;60:862-9. [PubMed abstract]
    Lazzerini M. Oral zinc provision in acute diarrhea. Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care 2016;19:239-43. [PubMed abstract]
    World Health Organization. Diarrhoeal Disease. 2017.
    Lazzerini M, Wanzira H. Oral zinc for treating diarrhoea in children. The Cochrane database of systematic reviews 2016;12:Cd005436. [PubMed abstract]
    Florez ID, Veroniki AA, Al Khalifah R, Yepes-Nuñez JJ, Sierra JM, Vernooij RWM, et al. Comparative effectiveness and safety of interventions for acute diarrhea and gastroenteritis in children: A systematic review and network meta-analysis. PLoS One 2018;13:e0207701. [PubMed abstract]
    UNICEF, World Health Organization. Clinical Management of Acute Diarrhea. 2004.
    Fleckenstein M, Keenan TDL, Guymer RH, Chakravarthy U, Schmitz-Valckenberg S, Klaver CC, et al. Age-related macular degeneration. Nat Rev Dis Primers 2021;7:31. [PubMed abstract]
    Evans JR, Lawrenson JG. Antioxidant vitamin and mineral supplements for slowing the progression of age-related macular degeneration. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2017;7:Cd000254. PMID: 28756618 [PubMed abstract]
    Age-Related Eye Disease Study Research Group. A randomized, placebo-controlled, clinical trial of high-dose supplementation with vitamins C and E, beta carotene, and zinc for age-related macular degeneration and vision loss: AREDS report no. 8. Arch Ophthalmol 2001;119:1417-36. [PubMed abstract]
    van Leeuwen R, Boekhoorn S, Vingerling JR, Witteman JC, Klaver CC, Hofman A, et al. Dietary intake of antioxidants and risk of age-related macular degeneration. JAMA 2005;294:3101-7. [PubMed abstract]
    Tan JS, Wang JJ, Flood V, Rochtchina E, Smith W, Mitchell P. Dietary antioxidants and the long-term incidence of age-related macular degeneration: the Blue Mountains Eye Study. Ophthalmology 2008;115:334-41. [PubMed abstract]
    Age-Related Eye Disease Study 2 Research Group. Lutein + zeaxanthin and omega-3 fatty acids for age-related macular degeneration: the Age-Related Eye Disease Study 2 (AREDS2) randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2013;309:2005-15. [PubMed abstract]
    National Eye Institute. AREDS/AREDS2 Frequently Asked Questions. 2020.
    National Eye Institute. AREDS/AREDS2 Clinical Trials. 2020.
    Fernandez-Cao JC, Warthon-Medina M, V HM, Arija V, Doepking C, Serra-Majem L, et al. Zinc intake and status and risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Nutrients 2019;11. [PubMed abstract]
    El Dib R, Gameiro OL, Ogata MS, Modolo NS, Braz LG, Jorge EC, et al. Zinc supplementation for the prevention of type 2 diabetes mellitus in adults with insulin resistance. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2015:Cd005525. [PubMed abstract]
    Asbaghi O, Sadeghian M, Fouladvand F, Panahande B, Nasiri M, Khodadost M, et al. Effects of zinc supplementation on lipid profile in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis 2020;30:1260-71. [PubMed abstract]
    Pompano LM, Boy E. Effects of dose and duration of zinc interventions on risk factors for type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Adv Nutr 2021;12:141-60. [PubMed abstract]
    Wang X, Wu W, Zheng W, Fang X, Chen L, Rink L, et al. Zinc supplementation improves glycemic control for diabetes prevention and management: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Am J Clin Nutr 2019;110:76-90. [PubMed abstract]
    Li X, Zhao J. The influence of zinc supplementation on metabolic status in gestational diabetes: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled studies. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 2021;34:2140-5. [PubMed abstract]
    Momen-Heravi M, Barahimi E, Razzaghi R, Bahmani F, Gilasi HR, Asemi Z. The effects of zinc supplementation on wound healing and metabolic status in patients with diabetic foot ulcer: A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Wound Repair Regen 2017;25:512-20. [PubMed abstract]
    Moore ZE, Corcoran MA, Patton D. Nutritional interventions for treating foot ulcers in people with diabetes. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2020;7:Cd011378. [PubMed abstract]
    Plum LM, Rink L, Haase H. The essential toxin: impact of zinc on human health. Int J Environ Res Public Health 2010;7:1342-65. [PubMed abstract]
    Spencer H, Norris C, Williams D. Inhibitory effects of zinc on magnesium balance and magnesium absorption in man. J Am Coll Nutr 1994;13:479-84. [PubMed abstract]
    Donaldson M, Touger-Decker R. Vitamin and mineral supplements: friend or foe when combined with medications? J Am Dent Assoc 2014;145:1153-8. [PubMed abstract]
    Lomaestro BM, Bailie GR. Absorption interactions with fluoroquinolones. 1995 update. Drug Saf 1995;12:314-33. [PubMed abstract]
    Chen JC, Chuang CH, Wang JD, Wang CW. Combination therapy using chelating agent and zinc for Wilson's isease. J Med Biol Eng 2015;35:697-708. [PubMed abstract]
    Suliburska J, Skrypnik K, Szulinska M, Kupsz J, Markuszewski L, Bogdanski P. Diuretics, ca-antagonists, and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors affect zinc status in hypertensive patients on monotherapy: a randomized trial. Nutrients 2018;10. [PubMed abstract]

Disclaimer

This fact sheet by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Office of Dietary Supplements (ODS) provides information that should not take the place of medical advice. We encourage you to talk to your health care providers (doctor, registered dietitian, pharmacist, etc.) about your interest in, questions about, or use of dietary supplements and what may be best for your overall health. Any mention in this publication of a specific product or service, or recommendation from an organization or professional society, does not represent an endorsement by ODS of that product, service, or expert advice.

Updated: January 6, 2026
